Goal: Create a topic with the partition count the ordering contract needs.
Wiring: partitions sized so each ordering key hashes with headroom (12 partitions for 3x growth), replication factor 3, min.insync.replicas 2, acks all on producers.
Why: partition count fixes the parallelism ceiling and the ordering granularity forever (splitting later reorders keys); ISR 2 of 3 survives one broker loss without stalling writes.
Misconfiguration: 1 partition "to keep ordering simple" — the whole topic processes single-threaded at 2% of needed throughput.
Verification: produce-order test per key asserts sequence preserved; kill-one-broker drill keeps writes flowing.

---

Goal: Size partitions for a 4x growth headroom without oversharding.
Wiring: target ~100MB/s per partition ceiling, consumer concurrency matched to partition count, key-hash review confirming hot keys spread.
Why: too few partitions caps throughput at single-thread speed; hundreds of tiny partitions inflate rebalance time and controller load.
Misconfiguration: 200 partitions for a 5MB/s topic, rebalances taking minutes for megabytes.
Verification: rebalance drill timed; per-partition throughput measured against the ceiling in load test.

---

Goal: Interpret consumer lag as error or capacity gap correctly.
Wiring: lag dashboards per partition (max and distribution, not just sum), with traffic overlay.
Why: summed lag hides skew — one hot partition at 400k beside eleven idle ones is a keying problem, not a capacity problem.
Misconfiguration: doubling consumers against skewed partitions, lag unchanged, bill doubled.
Verification: skew alert (any partition over 3x median) fires before the sum alert; capacity added only when all partitions lag together.

---

Goal: Keep poll loops healthy under slow processing.
Wiring: max.poll.interval.ms sized above the 99th processing time with margin, processing split so no single poll handles minutes of work, heartbeat thread untouched.
Why: exceeding the interval evicts the member, triggering rebalance storms that make the slowness contagious.
Misconfiguration: payment API called inline in the poll loop, 6-minute processing against a 5-minute interval, rebalance every cycle.
Verification: zero involuntary rebalances over a 1h soak at p99 processing load; interval breach alert fires before eviction.

---

Goal: Commit offsets with exactly-once intent per use case.
Wiring: enable.auto.commit false with synchronous commit after side effects for critical paths; async with callback and retry tracking where throughput dominates.
Why: auto-commit marks consumed what was never processed; commit-after-effect ties progress to outcomes.
Misconfiguration: auto-commit true with 5s interval plus a crash window — thousands of "processed" messages never touched.
Verification: kill-mid-batch drill shows redelivery (at-least-once) with idempotent consumers absorbing it, zero silent loss.

---

Goal: Use static membership to survive rolling restarts without rebalances.
Wiring: group.instance.id per pod (StatefulSet ordinal), session and rebalance timeouts sized to restart duration.
Why: members keep their partitions across restarts instead of triggering full rebalances per pod.
Misconfiguration: dynamic membership with aggressive timeouts, every deploy rebalancing for ten minutes.
Verification: rolling restart completes with zero partition movement; rebalance metric flat across the deploy.

---

Goal: Produce idempotently as the default for every producer.
Wiring: enable.idempotence true (implies acks all, retries unbounded within delivery.timeout, single in-flight per partition where ordering demands it).
Why: broker-side deduplication absorbs retries and failovers without application code.
Misconfiguration: retries 3 with idempotence off — every retry window risks duplicates the consumers must somehow detect.
Verification: broker-kill drill during production shows zero duplicates downstream; config audit asserts idempotence on.

---

Goal: Batch and compress for throughput without latency drift.
Wiring: linger.ms small (5–20ms), batch.size matched to average record, compression lz4 or zstd, buffer.memory bounded.
Why: batching amortizes request overhead; linger caps the added latency explicitly instead of letting it emerge.
Misconfiguration: linger 500ms "for efficiency" adding half a second to p99, or no batching at all with 10x request overhead.
Verification: p99 latency vs throughput curve recorded per topic; linger changes re-measured, never assumed.

---

Goal: Retry with backoff that respects the broker.
Wiring: retries effectively unbounded within delivery.timeout.ms, retry.backoff exponential from 100ms, idempotence on so retries are safe.
Why: transient broker blips resolve in seconds; giving up early converts blips into data loss.
Misconfiguration: retries 0 "to fail fast", dropping every record that coincides with a leader election.
Verification: leader-election drill shows delayed-but-delivered records, zero loss; retry-storm guard via backoff verified in metrics.

---

Goal: Propagate trace and tenant context in record headers.
Wiring: traceparent plus tenant id plus correlation id set at produce time, read at consume time into the logging context.
Why: headers travel with the record through retries, DLQs, and replays; side-channel context stores drift out of sync.
Misconfiguration: tenant in a parallel database table keyed by offset — compacted, deleted, or lagging behind the record it describes.
Verification: header-presence test per topic; incident drill joins producer and consumer logs on one key.

---

Goal: Run transactions with fencing for exactly-once pipelines.
Wiring: unique transactional.id per instance (pod ordinal suffix), transaction boundaries around consume-transform-produce, abort on fence with full rejoin.
Why: fencing turns split-brain producers into a loud error instead of silent duplicates; EOS holds across the read-process-write cycle.
Misconfiguration: shared transactional.id across replicas after a rolling deploy — ProducerFencedException mid-transaction, half-committed state.
Verification: 50k-message audit shows zero duplicates and zero gaps; fence drill (duplicate id started deliberately) aborts loudly.

---

Goal: Bound the EOS scope honestly: what exactly-once covers and what it cannot.
Wiring: EOS across Kafka read-process-write; side effects outside Kafka (emails, charges) made idempotent separately with keys.
Why: transactions cannot span the email gateway; claiming EOS end-to-end without idempotent sinks is a fiction that fails at the first retry.
Misconfiguration: "exactly-once checkout" with a non-idempotent charge call inside the transaction boundary drawing.
Verification: side-effect audit per pipeline (each sink idempotent or single-writer); duplicate-delivery drill asserts single effects.

---

Goal: Route poison messages to a DLQ with cause headers, never looping forever.
Wiring: 3 attempts with backoff, then publish raw bytes plus headers (topic, partition, offset, exception type, timestamp) to source.DLQ, commit the offset, alert on DLQ growth.
Why: unbounded retry replays the same record forever, freezing the partition; DLQ preserves evidence while unblocking progress.
Misconfiguration: infinite retry "until it succeeds" — lag frozen for six hours on one malformed Avro record.
Verification: poison fixture drains lag, DLQ holds the record with cause headers, alert fires once, replay runbook tested on staging.

---

Goal: Handle schema incompatibility without stopping the world.
Wiring: compatibility mode BACKWARD for consumer-evolving topics; producer-side pre-registration check in CI; incompatible schemas rejected before deploy.
Why: catching incompatibility at CI time costs minutes; catching it in production costs the topic.
Misconfiguration: field changed from optional to required, deployed Friday, all old consumers crash-looping by Monday.
Verification: compatibility check in the schema CI job; dual-read migration pattern (new optional field first, required next quarter) documented per change.

---

Goal: Choose subject naming per domain deliberately.
Wiring: TopicNameStrategy where each topic owns its schema evolution; RecordNameStrategy where one event type spans topics with shared evolution.
Why: naming decides what "compatible" is measured against; the wrong strategy blocks legal changes or permits breaking ones.
Misconfiguration: default strategy everywhere, blocking an independent topic's evolution because an unrelated topic shares the subject.
Verification: naming decision recorded per topic family; compatibility test asserts the intended strategy per subject.

---

Goal: Secure the schema registry like any other API.
Wiring: registry behind authentication, write access limited to CI deploy roles, compatibility enforcement server-side (not client-honored).
Why: an open registry lets anyone register a breaking schema that crashes every consumer.
Misconfiguration: registry writable anonymously "because it's internal".
Verification: anonymous-write probe rejected; compatibility-bypass attempt rejected server-side.

---

Goal: Build Streams topologies with standby replicas for fast recovery.
Wiring: num.standby.replicas 1, state stores with changelog topics, commit interval tuned, staggered rolling restarts.
Why: standbys hold warm state so rebalances restore in seconds instead of replaying hours of changelog.
Misconfiguration: zero standbys with 50GB state stores — every deploy replays from scratch for nine minutes.
Verification: rebalance drill under 90s across three deploys; state-size dashboard with growth alerts.

---

Goal: Use the Streams DLQ support for deserialization failures.
Wiring: deserialization exception handler routing to the DLQ topic with record metadata, processing continuing.
Why: one malformed record must not halt the topology; the DLQ preserves it for analysis and replay.
Misconfiguration: default handler crashing the thread, topology down until manual intervention per bad record.
Verification: malformed-record fixture lands in DLQ with metadata; topology throughput unaffected; replay drill succeeds.

---

Goal: Operate Queues for Kafka (share groups, KIP-932 GA) where point-to-point fits.
Wiring: share group per worker pool, per-record-delivery semantics with explicit acknowledge, visibility timeouts sized to processing p99.
Why: queues give competing consumers without partition-assignment surgery for workloads that need work-sharing, not ordering.
Misconfiguration: share groups for strictly ordered per-key processing — ordering guarantees silently absent.
Verification: ordering-requirement checklist per topic decides queue vs consumer-group; redelivery test asserts at-least-once with idempotent handlers.

---

Goal: Configure Connect workers with secret hygiene and rolling safety.
Wiring: secrets via mounted files from the manager (never properties files in git), tasks balanced with connectors versioned alongside worker images, rolling restarts one worker at a time.
Why: Connect holds credentials for every integrated system; its config is the highest-value file in the streaming stack.
Misconfiguration: connector passwords in versioned JSON, readable by every repo viewer.
Verification: secret scanner covers connector configs; rolling restart keeps all 12 tasks running; config drift test per connector.

---

Goal: Authenticate clients with SASL/SCRAM against the current baseline.
Wiring: SASL_SSL with SCRAM-SHA-512, credentials from the secret store mounted per workload, rotation via versioned secrets with worker rolling.
Why: SCRAM avoids plaintext password equivalents on the wire; per-workload credentials bound blast radius.
Misconfiguration: PLAINTEXT with SASL on an internal network "because VPC", readable by any packet capture on shared infrastructure.
Verification: plaintext-listener probe refused; rotation drill (new secret version, rolling restart) completes without task loss.

---

Goal: Authorize with ACLs per principal, DLQs mirroring sources.
Wiring: per-service principals with topic-level allow (produce/consume/describe on exactly their topics), DLQ topics carrying the same grants as sources, deny-by-default with audit.
Why: broad ACLs turn one compromised consumer into cluster-wide read access; mirrored DLQ grants keep replay usable without escalation.
Misconfiguration: one super-user credential shared by all services "to avoid ACL toil".
Verification: unauthorized-topic probe denied per principal; DLQ replay works with source-equivalent grants, nothing broader.

---

Goal: Lay out the KRaft quorum to survive an AZ loss.
Wiring: 3 (or 5) controllers spread across AZs with anti-affinity, controllers separated from brokers, voters distinct from observers.
Why: Raft needs a majority of voters; co-located controllers share one fate, and the metadata quorum is the cluster's brain.
Misconfiguration: three controllers on one AZ "for latency" — one outage stalls all metadata updates.
Verification: AZ-kill drill in staging re-elects in seconds with produce/consume uninterrupted; controller distribution asserted in config audit.

---

Goal: Isolate controllers from brokers operationally.
Wiring: dedicated controller nodes (or combined mode only in dev), separate disks and heap sizing, controller metrics on their own dashboard.
Why: broker GC pauses must never stall metadata; combined mode couples two failure domains for convenience.
Misconfiguration: combined nodes in production, broker heap pressure pausing leader elections cluster-wide.
Verification: broker-chaos drill (heap pressure injected) shows stable controller leadership; combined mode banned by config test in prod.

---

Goal: Rack awareness for replica placement and fetch locality.
Wiring: broker.rack set per AZ, replica assignment rack-aware, fetch-from-follower enabled for cross-AZ cost control.
Why: replicas spread across racks survive rack failure; follower fetching keeps cross-AZ bandwidth bills bounded.
Misconfiguration: rack-unaware placement putting all three replicas of hot partitions in one AZ.
Verification: replica-distribution audit per hot topic; cross-AZ fetch ratio dashboarded.

---

Goal: Tiered storage for retention economics.
Wiring: local retention bounded (days), remote storage (object store) for months, segment rolling sized for upload efficiency.
Why: local disks buy performance, object storage buys history; tiering keeps both without choosing.
Misconfiguration: infinite local retention until disks fill at 3am, or aggressive 24h deletion destroying the audit trail regulators require.
Verification: retention policy per topic with business owner and legal basis; storage-cost dashboard per tier; restore-from-remote drill quarterly.

---

Goal: Plan capacity from measured per-partition ceilings.
Wiring: produce/consume benchmarks per instance type recorded, headroom policy (50% sustained max), partition growth procedure with key-hash review.
Why: capacity from vendor slides fails on contact with real serializers and real keys; measured ceilings plus headroom survive growth.
Misconfiguration: "Kafka handles millions of messages" as the capacity plan, partitions fixed at topic creation in 2021.
Verification: quarterly benchmark refresh; headroom alert fires before ceilings, never after.

---

Goal: Upgrade Kafka with version-pinned procedure and protocol checks.
Wiring: upgrade one minor at a time through supported paths, metadata version gates stepped deliberately, client compatibility matrix verified first.
Why: broker-client protocol mismatches fail subtly (feature-gated behaviors silently absent); metadata upgrades are one-way doors.
Misconfiguration: skipping two majors over the weekend with untested clients.
Verification: client-matrix green before brokers move; metadata-version gate checklist signed; rollback snapshot (downgrade path) confirmed available before starting.

---

Goal: Monitor the four signals that predict incidents.
Wiring: under-replicated partitions, controller leadership changes, request-queue time (broker overload), and consumer lag distribution — each with runbooks.
Why: these four precede nearly every Kafka incident class; everything else is diagnosis detail.
Misconfiguration: forty metrics dashboarded, none alerted; the URP spike discovered by a customer.
Verification: each signal has a firing drill on record; alert thresholds derived from incident history, not defaults.

---

Goal: Handle large messages without breaking the cluster.
Wiring: max.message.bytes and replica.fetch.max.bytes raised together with segment and buffer math done, large-payload topics separated from small-record topics.
Why: brokers, replicas, and consumers must agree on size limits or large records wedge replication; mixing sizes wastes memory on small records.
Misconfiguration: 10MB payloads on the default 1MB limit, producer exceptions cascading into DLQ floods.
Verification: size-limit matrix test per topic; large-payload topics isolated with their own retention math.

---

Goal: Migrate the last ZooKeeper-era assumptions out (historical note, one line only).
Wiring: ZooKeeper-based tooling, flags, and runbooks removed; KRaft is the only mode and all operational knowledge assumes it.
Why: leftover ZK-era procedures (ensemble health checks, znode inspections) waste incident time and mislead new operators.
Verification: repo grep for zookeeper returns zero outside this historical line; runbooks reference controllers, never ensembles.
Historical note: clusters migrated ZooKeeper to KRaft via dual-mode on 3.x before the 4.x upgrade; ZooKeeper was removed entirely in Kafka 4.0.

---

Goal: Secure inter-broker communication end to end.
Wiring: TLS on all listeners including inter-broker and controller, SASL between brokers where policy demands, the same CA discipline as client-facing listeners.
Why: "internal network" still carries every record in plaintext to anyone with network access; encryption boundaries follow data, not diagrams.
Misconfiguration: TLS on the client listener only, inter-broker plaintext justified by VPC.
Verification: packet-capture drill on the broker network shows no plaintext records; listener-config audit per broker.

---

Goal: Test the whole topology quarterly with a chaos drill.
Wiring: scheduled drill rotating through broker kill, AZ loss, poison record, schema break, credential rotation, and version upgrade rehearsal.
Why: untested paths (DLQ replay, quorum re-election, fence recovery) are where incidents become outages.
Misconfiguration: drills run once at launch, procedures rotting for two years until needed.
Verification: drill log with findings-to-tickets traceability; untested-path inventory shrinks per quarter, never grows.

---

Goal: Document topic ownership and lifecycle per topic.
Wiring: owner team, retention basis, schema subject, ACL principals, deprecation status recorded alongside the topic definition as code.
Why: ownerless topics accumulate retention nobody defends and consumers nobody knows; lifecycle review needs the facts in one place.
Verification: quarterly lifecycle review consumes this registry; orphaned topics reassigned or retired with consumer sign-off.

---

Goal: Read only committed data on EOS consumers.
Wiring: isolation.level read_committed on every consumer in a transactional pipeline.
Why: read_uncommitted exposes aborted messages that the producer rolled back; downstream acts on ghosts.
Misconfiguration: default read_uncommitted kept "for latency", aborted orders processed and shipped.
Verification: abort-injection test asserts aborted records invisible; consumer config audit asserts the level per transactional topic.

---

Goal: Enable exactly-once in Streams with the current guarantee setting.
Wiring: processing.guarantee exactly_once_v2 with the transactional state stores and changelog topics it requires.
Why: v2 removes the version-one performance penalties that made teams disable EOS; the guarantee covers the topology's own read-process-write.
Misconfiguration: EOS flag on with an incompatible older setting, silently degrading to at-least-once while dashboards claim exactly-once.
Verification: guarantee setting asserted in config audit; kill-mid-topology drill shows no duplicates in output topics.

---

Goal: Configure compaction plus retention per topic economics.
Wiring: cleanup.policy compact,delete with min.compaction.lag.ms sized to consumer catch-up, segment.ms tuned for upload granularity, remote retention per the topic's legal basis.
Why: compaction keeps latest keys while delete bounds history; lag settings protect slow consumers from reading compacted-away data they still need.
Misconfiguration: compact-only with no delete on a high-churn topic — unbounded disk growth wearing a compaction costume.
Verification: disk-growth projection per topic reviewed quarterly; lagging-consumer test passes against compacted topics.

---

Goal: Tune consumer fetch behavior instead of accepting defaults.
Wiring: fetch.min.bytes and fetch.max.wait.ms balanced (small waits for latency-sensitive, larger batches for throughput), max.poll.records sized so worst-case processing fits inside the poll interval.
Why: defaults optimize for the average pipeline; slow per-record processing needs smaller polls, chatty small records need bigger fetches.
Misconfiguration: max.poll.records 500 with 2s-per-record processing — every poll cycle evicts the member.
Verification: worst-case processing budget documented per consumer; poll-interval math asserted in config review.

---

Goal: Run Connect distributed with survivable restarts.
Wiring: offset, config, and status storage topics replicated 3x with compaction where appropriate; connectors versioned with worker images; exactly-once support enabled per connector capability.
Why: Connect's own state lives in Kafka topics; losing them loses connector positions and duplicates or drops synced data.
Misconfiguration: single-replica offset topic on a dev broker carried into production — one broker loss replays three days of syncs.
Verification: storage-topic replication asserted; worker-kill drill resumes connectors from stored offsets without mass replay.

---

Goal: Size log segments for tiered upload efficiency.
Wiring: segment.bytes and segment.ms tuned so closed segments upload promptly without fragmenting into thousands of tiny objects.
Why: tiered storage uploads whole closed segments; tiny segments multiply object counts and list costs, huge segments delay remote availability.
Misconfiguration: 1GB segments with 7-day roll on a low-volume topic — remote tier permanently days behind.
Verification: segment-age distribution dashboarded; remote-availability lag within the topic's recovery objective.

---

Goal: Move a consumer fleet to the new consumer group protocol without breaking assignment semantics.
Context: Kafka 4.3 logs a recommendation to leave the classic protocol (KIP-1274), and the broker-side protocol-list config is deprecated for removal in 5.0 (KIP-1237).
Config:
group.protocol=consumer
why: the new protocol moves assignment server-side, which makes static membership and per-partition delivery consistent across rolling restarts; the classic protocol with cooperative-sticky assignor remains available for the mixed-version window.
Canonical failure: clients still on the classic protocol join a classic-protocol group; the fleet splits into two protocol lanes and lag attribution becomes split-brain.
Verify: `kafka-consumer-groups.sh --describe` reports the protocol column for every group; no group falls back to classic unless explicitly pinned.

---

Goal: Authenticate Kafka clients with OAuth client assertions on 4.3.1.
Context: sasl.oauthbearer.assertion.algorithm/claim.iss/claim.aud/claim.sub and the assertion-file options are new in 4.3 (KIP-1258); they let the client sign a JWT assertion (RS256/ES256) instead of shipping a client secret.
Config:
sasl.oauthbearer.assertion.algorithm=RS256
sasl.oauthbearer.assertion.claim.iss=broker-client
sasl.oauthbearer.assertion.claim.aud=https://broker.oidc.example/token
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginCallbackHandler
sasl.oauthbearer.jwt.validator.class=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.BrokerJwtValidator
Why: private_key_jwt keeps the secret off the wire; BrokerJwtValidator validates signature, issuer, and audience, which is the thing CVE-2026-33557 (4.1.0–4.1.1) got wrong — the default DefaultJwtValidator accepted any well-formed JWT. Do not run 4.1.0/4.1.1 without explicitly setting the broker validator.
Canonical failure: Kicking the client with an unsigned or wrong-audience JWT, and watching the broker accept it, means the broker is on the weak default validator.
Verify: A signed assertion from the registered client authenticates; a self-signed or wrong-azd assertion is rejected and the validator class in the broker log is BrokerJwtValidator.

---

Legacy: ZooKeeper-era settings (`zookeeper.connect`, `inter.broker.protocol.version`, `reserved.broker.max.id`) left in server.properties on a KRaft broker.
Replacement: strip them; `node.id`, `process.roles`, and `controller.listener.names` cover the KRaft layout.
Symptom: The broker refuses to start with "zookeeper.connect is not a recognized configuration".

---

Legacy: Handover settings with a classic rebalancer while claiming exactly-once for cross-partition transactions.
Replacement: the new consumer group protocol (`group.protocol=consumer`) and a unique `transactional.id` per producer instance.
Symptom: Rebalance storms on every `max.poll.interval.ms` expiration, plus periodic `ProducerFencedException` once a second producer joins with the same id.

---

Goal: Stop a consumer without losing in-flight work or triggering a rebalance storm during a rolling deploy.
Wiring:
props.put(ConsumerConfig.MAX_POLL_RECORDS, 50);
props.put(ConsumerConfig.SESSION_TIMEOUT_MS_CONFIG, 25000);
props.put(ConsumerConfig.MAX_POLL_INTERVAL_MS_CONFIG, 300000);
Runtime.getRuntime().addShutdownHook(new Thread(() -> { draining.set(false); consumer.wakeup(); }));
// loop: poll -> process -> commit; on WakeupException, finish the current batch, commit, then close
Why: `close()` is what leaves the group cleanly; a killed process instead waits out the session timeout, and every peer pays a rebalance. `wakeup()` is the only safe interruption for a blocked `poll`, and `max.poll.interval.ms` must exceed the real worst-case batch time or the broker evicts a consumer that is merely busy, not stuck. Committing after the batch and before the close is what turns "at-least-once" into "at-least-once with a small, boring overlap".
Misconfiguration: calling `close()` from another thread while the poll loop is blocked, or processing 500 messages per poll with a 5-minute dependency and the default 5-minute interval, which reads as a poison message until the batch size drops.
A clean leave is one line in the client log: `[Consumer clientId=consumer-orders-sync-1, groupId=orders-sync] Member consumer-orders-sync-1-8f2c6d1a sending LeaveGroup request to controller broker-1:9092 (id: 1 rack: null)`. The shape of not leaving is louder and worse: `Attempt to heartbeat failed since group is rebalancing` in one pod, and every peer logging a generation bump in the same second.
Verification: during a rolling restart the group's lag returns to baseline within one batch and rebalance count per deploy is at the expected ceiling; a test asserts no message is dropped and the duplicate window is bounded by the commit interval.

---

Goal: Choose a subject naming strategy that lets a domain evolve without breaking every consumer.
Wiring:
kafka.transforms.unsafe.start=false
key.subject.name.strategy=io.confluent.kafka.serializers.subject.TopicRecordNameStrategy
value.subject.name.strategy=io.confluent.kafka.serializers.subject.TopicRecordNameStrategy
compatibility.level=BACKWARD_TRANSITIVE
Why: `TopicNameStrategy` (one schema per topic) is the default and the right first answer, because it keeps the topic's contract singular. `TopicRecordNameStrategy` lets several record types share a topic, which fits an event topic that genuinely carries a family of events — and it shifts compatibility from "one evolving contract" to "N contracts", where a new record type is additive for the registry and yet a breaking change for every consumer that assumed a single shape.
Misconfiguration: switching strategies mid-life on a topic with history — the old subjects stay under the old names, compatibility checks stop covering what producers actually publish, and the registry reports green while consumers break.
When the registry is watching, it says so: `Message was incompatible with subject orders.events-value (compatibility: BACKWARD_TRANSITIVE)`. When the compatibility level was set on a subject nobody publishes to, it says nothing, and the consumer finds out by throwing.
Verification: registry tooling asserts every published subject for the topic resolves to a schema under the intended strategy; a consumer test replays the full history of the topic against the current reader, not only the newest version.

---

Goal: Make authorization, quota and audit all answerable from the principal, not from a network position.
Wiring:
security.protocol=SASL_SSL
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.oauthbearer.assertion.algorithm=RS256
producer.prefix.order=orders-service            # client.id per owning service
allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found=false            # read the current default in the 4.3 reference before trusting it
--add-principal-binding, then: kafka-acls --add --allow-principal User:orders-service --operation Read --topic orders.events
Why: a per-service principal makes an ACL map reviewable and makes an incident answerable — who read this topic, from which client id, at what offset. `client.id` is a debugging label and is attacker-settable in a permissive cluster, so it complements the principal; it does not replace it. Leaving the no-ACL default permissive turns an exposed listener into an open fire hydrant (the exploitation of exactly that posture is 31).
Misconfiguration: one shared service account for every producer, so a revoked credential is a fleet-wide outage; DLQ topics left out of the ACL plan, so a dead-letter path fails on the way to being useful; schema registry left unauthenticated next to an authorized broker.
`org.apache.kafka.common.errors.GroupAuthorizationException: Not authorized to access group: orders-sync` is the staging failure you want. The production failure with a shared credential and no authorizer configured is the absence of any such line.
listeners=SASL_SSL://0.0.0.0:9093
authorizer.class.name=org.apache.kafka.metadata.authorizer.StandardAuthorizer
allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found=false
super.users=User:kafka-admin
KRaft's own authorizer, configured in the same file as the listener — and the third line is the one whose default must be read from the 4.3 reference rather than remembered from a ZooKeeper-era blog post.
Verification: a config-parse test asserts every listener maps to a security protocol and that the authorizer is configured; a probe with a wrong principal gets an authorization error rather than a timeout, and the DLQ ACLs mirror the source topics.

---

Goal: Retry a producer without reordering a key's messages or paying for a stall you did not choose.
Wiring:
enable.idempotence=true                # default on since 3.0; keeps it explicit here
acks=all
retries=Integer.MAX_VALUE
retry.backoff.ms=100
request.timeout.ms=30000
delivery.timeout.ms=120000
max.in.flight.requests.per.connection=5
Why: with idempotence enabled, up to five in-flight requests per connection keep throughput while per-partition ordering survives retries, because the broker deduplicates by sequence number. `delivery.timeout.ms` bounds the whole attempt window — it must be at least `request.timeout.ms` plus the remaining retries — and it is the number that decides how long a producer stalls when a partition leader dies.
Misconfiguration: turning idempotence off "to debug", which silently drops the ordering guarantee that the consumer's idempotent upsert was relying on; or setting `delivery.timeout.ms` below `linger.ms` plus one request timeout, which produces `TimeoutException` on records that were never sent.
Verification: a test kills the partition leader mid-burst and asserts per-key order survives and no duplicates appear in the sink; the timeout budget is asserted by a unit test on the config, not discovered under load.

---

Goal: Let a share-group consumer hold a record for minutes of processing without the delivery expiring into someone else's hands.
Wiring:
group.protocol=share
share.acknowledgement.mode=pick
// per record: ack ACCEPT after commit, RELEASE on a transient dependency failure, REJECT for a permanent one
// for long work: renew the delivery lease while processing continues
Why: in a share group the broker tracks delivery state and hands the record to another member when its session lapses, so long work has to say so explicitly — a renewal keeps the record, an acknowledgement ends it. `pick` mode puts the choice per record, which is what a pipeline with mixed outcomes needs; `implied` commits on poll and does not fit that shape.
Misconfiguration: renewing by polling more while holding a batch whose lease was never extended, so the record is redelivered mid-processing and the sink sees a second copy after the first already succeeded — which is a duplicate, not a redelivery, the moment the first attempt has committed.
`$ kafka-share-groups.sh --bootstrap-server 10.0.14.7:9092 --describe --group orders-ack`
`SHARE-GROUP  STATE    TOPIC          PARTITION  START-OFFSET  LAG  LEAD  MEMBER-ID`
`orders-ack   Stable   orders.events  3          1842201       12   0   consumer-1`
Share groups get their own describe tool in 4.3; a reader that appears only in `kafka-consumer-groups.sh` is a different kind of subscriber, which is worth knowing before someone else's subscriber shows up there (31 owns that adversary).
Verification: a drill where one record's processing exceeds the lease asserts either a successful renewal or a single deliberate redelivery, and the sink's idempotent upsert makes the overlap harmless (the ordering guarantee itself stays per key, as with any other group).

---

Goal: Consumer lag rising with no errors, no rebalances, and throughput that looks normal on the dashboard.
Wiring:
kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server 10.0.14.7:9092 --describe --group orders-svc   # per-partition LAG, not the sum
kafka-run-class.sh kafka.tools.GetOffsetShell --broker-list 10.0.14.7:9092 --topic orders.events   # or the LOG-END-OFFSET column above
Rate check: compare `MessagesInPerSec` with `BytesInPerSec` and with consumer `records-lead`/`bytes-consumed-rate` over the same window.
Why: the group total hides the shape. Sixteen partitions with fourteen idle and two saturated gives a healthy mean and a growing lag, and the two hot partitions are hot because one key carries the traffic — so the discriminating measurement is lag *per partition against its median*, not lag against a threshold. The second discriminator is the message-size ratio: if message bytes doubled while counts stayed flat, single-threaded per-partition throughput fell by half without any code change and without one error line.
Misconfiguration: raising the partition count as a reflex. It is the right answer to a capacity problem and the wrong answer to a skew problem, and the test that tells them apart is cheap — if the hot tenant hashes onto the same two partitions after the increase, nothing was fixed and the rebuild cost was real.
Verification: max per-partition lag under the stated bound at current volume, an alert on any partition exceeding a multiple of the median, and a key-distribution report on the hot topic so the next twentyfold tenant is a plan rather than an incident (the transcript version is 02).

---

Goal: A producer occasionally blocks for the whole `max.block.ms` and then throws, with no broker-side error anywhere.
Wiring:
props.put(ProducerConfig.MAX_BLOCK_MS_CONFIG, 60000);
props.put(ProducerConfig.BUFFER_MEMORY_CONFIG, 33554432L);
props.put(ProducerConfig.LINGER_MS_CONFIG, 20);
props.put(ProducerConfig.BATCH_SIZE_CONFIG, 32768);
Reading: `max.block.ms` bounds two different waits and the exception text says which. Waiting for *metadata* means the leader for that partition is unknown — a topic that does not exist yet, a `UNKNOWN_TOPIC_OR_PARTITION` behind the scenes, or a blocked egress path to the controller; waiting for *buffer memory* means the accumulator is full, which means the network cannot drain at the rate records arrive. The discriminator is therefore not "is Kafka slow" but which of the two counters moved: buffer exhaustion shows up in producer metrics as `waiting-threads` and memory usage at the ceiling, metadata waits show up with a fresh cluster or a first send after a leader change.
Misconfiguration: raising `max.block.ms` to 120s, which converts a stall into a longer stall and moves the failure into the request path, where the caller's timeout has already fired and the caller is retrying — so the buffer fills faster than before and the incident looks like a Kafka problem with a Kafka-shaped cause.
Verification: a test asserts the producer fails fast with the exception naming the reason under a drained-buffer fixture, producer metrics for buffer utilisation and waiting threads are exported with the same dashboard as the endpoint's p99, and the sizing of buffer memory is stated in the config with the throughput number that motivated it.

---

Goal: Track tailed-file offsets in a registry so shipper restarts are boring.
Wiring: offset registry keyed by file identity (inode plus path) holding the byte offset, fsynced per acknowledged batch; rotation detected by inode change, the old file drained to its end offset before the new file starts.
Why: without durable offsets every shipper restart re-ships or skips; the registry turns restarts into resume-from-bookmark.
Misconfiguration: offsets kept in memory, every deploy duplicating a day of logs into the topic or silently skipping the rotated file.
Verification: kill-restart drill shows zero gaps with duplicates bounded by the batch window; rotation fixture covers both rename and copy-truncate modes.

---

Goal: Stitch multiline records before any parsing touches them.
Wiring: multiline codec at the shipper (start pattern such as a timestamp, continuation otherwise), timeout flushing partial events, max-bytes cap per stitched event.
Why: stack traces and pretty-printed payloads span lines; shipping line-by-line turns one exception into forty unrelated events with forty alerts.
Misconfiguration: parsing per line, fragments indexed as independent errors, exception counts inflated fortyfold and unqueryable as units.
Verification: multiline fixture (multi-line stack trace) arrives as exactly one event; timeout-flush test bounds partial-event memory under a truncated stream.

---

Goal: Route unparsable shipper input to a file dead-letter with metrics.
Wiring: parse failures appended to a local dead-letter file with source offset and error cause, counter incremented per failure class, shipping continuing past the bad line; replay by re-pointing a tailer at the dead-letter file.
Why: one corrupt line must not stall the file; evidence preserved locally where the operator who owns the source can inspect it.
Misconfiguration: corrupt lines dropped silently (data loss discovered never), or the shipper crashing per bad line (one bad byte as a fleet-wide outage).
Verification: corrupt-line fixture lands in dead-letter with its offset; shipper throughput unaffected during the fixture; replay drill re-ingests after the parser fix.

---

Goal: Propagate broker backpressure to shippers instead of buffering blindly.
Wiring: shipper watches produce-block rate and buffer fullness; on sustained backpressure it pauses tailing (file offsets held, data at rest in files) and spills to a bounded disk queue; alert fires before the spill approaches its bound.
Why: unbounded shipper buffering converts one broker incident into simultaneous shipper outages fleet-wide; pausing keeps the data safe where it already sits.
Misconfiguration: retry queue unbounded in memory, a broker slowdown exhausting every shipper's heap within minutes of the original incident.
Verification: broker-stall drill shows paused tailing, bounded spill growth, zero shipper restarts; resume drains the spill in offset order with no gaps.
