Design decision: POST creates, PUT replaces, PATCH modifies, DELETE removes; GET never mutates.
Contract fragment:
POST /users -> 201 with Location: /users/{id}
DELETE /users/{id} -> 204, no body
Why: method semantics let intermediaries, clients, and audits reason uniformly; a GET that mutates breaks caching, prefetching, and CSRF assumptions at once.
Versioning note: method set frozen per major version; new actions become sub-resources, never verbs in URLs.
Verification: contract test asserts no state change on any GET; method-not-allowed returns 405 with an Allow header.

---

Design decision: Status codes used precisely across the API.
Contract fragment: 200 ok with body, 201 created with Location, 202 accepted with status URL, 204 no content, 400 validation failure, 401 unauthenticated, 403 unauthorized, 404 absent (or existence-hidden), 409 conflict, 422 semantic refusal, 429 throttled.
Why: clients branch on codes, not message strings; precise codes make retries, auth flows, and error handling programmable.
Versioning note: codes per endpoint documented in OpenAPI and never narrowed without a version bump.
Verification: status-assertion test per endpoint per outcome; message-matching on the client banned in review.

---

Design decision: RFC 9457 problem details as the single error shape.
Contract fragment:
{"type": "https://api.acme.test/problems/user-not-found", "title": "User not found",
 "status": 404, "detail": "No user with that id in your tenant.", "instance": "/users/9d44",
 "requestId": "req_9f2", "code": "USER_NOT_FOUND"}
Why: type URIs document, titles inform humans, codes branch machines, requestId joins logs; one shape replaces per-endpoint ad-hoc maps.
Versioning note: new codes are additive; code removal is a breaking change with sunset.
Verification: shape test per error (fields present, no stack bytes, no sensitive values); docs URIs resolve in CI link check.

---

Design decision: ETags with If-Match for concurrent writes.
Contract fragment:
GET returns ETag: "users-acme-9d44-v3"; PUT requires If-Match, else 412 Precondition Failed on mismatch.
Why: optimistic concurrency without locks; lost updates become explicit 412s the client merges instead of silent overwrites.
Versioning note: ETag format opaque and versioned internally; clients treat it as an opaque token, never parse it.
Verification: concurrent-edit test asserts 412 with current state; stale-write drill shows zero silent overwrites.

---

Design decision: Cache-Control tiers per resource volatility.
Contract fragment: reference data public, max-age=3600; user data private, max-age=30; realtime no-store.
Why: intermediaries and clients cache aggressively only where freshness allows; private directive keeps tenant data out of shared caches.
Versioning note: cache directives versioned with the resource; directive changes announced because they alter client behavior.
Verification: header assertions per route class; private-data-in-shared-cache probe fails.

---

Design decision: Retry-After (RFC 9110) as the throttle signal every client can trust.
Contract fragment:
429 with Retry-After: 60 plus {"code": "RATE_LIMITED", "retryAfterSec": 60}
Why: Retry-After is finished RFC semantics, implemented everywhere; it is the one rate-limit signal immune to draft churn.
Versioning note: stable across versions; body code additive.
Verification: throttle test asserts header plus body agreement; client backoff honors the header value exactly.

---

Design decision: Legacy X-RateLimit-* headers with documented reset semantics, IETF draft headers alongside only.
Contract fragment:
X-RateLimit-Limit: 100, X-RateLimit-Remaining: 12, X-RateLimit-Reset: epoch seconds, documented as such.
Why: vendor conventions vary (reset as seconds, millis, or datetime); documenting ours removes the ambiguity the ecosystem suffers. The IETF RateLimit/RateLimit-Policy fields remain draft-v11 as of 2026-10 (review "not ready", syntax moving) — shipped alongside, never instead, with the draft version recorded.
Versioning note: header additions are additive; reset-semantics changes are breaking.
Verification: header-semantics test asserts units; draft headers validated against a real Structured Fields implementation, version pinned.

---

Design decision: Idempotency-Key on every mutating endpoint that touches money or state.
Contract fragment: same key plus same payload replays the stored response; same key plus different payload returns 422; keys expire after 24h.
Why: network retries and double-clicks become safe replays instead of duplicate charges.
Versioning note: key semantics frozen per major version; expiry changes announced.
Verification: double-submit drill asserts single effect with identical replay body; changed-payload probe asserts 422.

---

Design decision: OpenAPI-first for public contracts, generation-gated in CI.
Contract fragment: spec edited first, server stubs and client types generated, drift fails the build.
Why: the spec is the contract both sides program against; code-first specs describe whatever shipped, including mistakes.
Versioning note: spec versioned with the API; breaking diff blocks merge without a version bump.
Verification: CI diff job fails on undocumented routes or shape changes; generated clients compile in the same pipeline.

---

Design decision: Resource modeling with nouns, sub-resources for actions that do not fit.
Contract fragment: /orders/{id}/cancel as a sub-resource POST (an action creating a cancellation), not POST /cancelOrder.
Why: nouns keep routing, authz matrices, and caching uniform; verbs in URLs fragment every one of them.
Versioning note: new sub-resources additive; verb-URLs never introduced, existing ones sunset with dates.
Verification: routing audit greps for verb-URLs in reviews; auth matrix covers each sub-resource explicitly.

---

Design decision: Keyset pagination as the default with opaque cursors.
Contract fragment: ?limit=25&cursor=ey... response {data: [...], next_cursor: ey... or null}; cursor base64, never parsed client-side.
Why: O(log n + limit) at any depth with stable results under inserts; opaque cursors keep the encoding free to evolve.
Versioning note: cursor format internal and versioned; clients treating it as data break on their own terms, documented.
Verification: page-concatenation test equals the full ordered query; depth-400 benchmark asserts bounded time.

---

Design decision: OFFSET allowed only with written justification and a cap.
Contract fragment: ?offset= with max 1000 and a deprecation header pointing at the cursor variant.
Why: small admin lists genuinely need random access; unbounded OFFSET is a full-scan footgun at depth.
Versioning note: offset variant sunset-dated from introduction; cursor variant canonical from day one.
Verification: depth-cap test asserts 400 responses past the max; deprecation header asserted present.

---

Design decision: Filtering and sorting through an allow-listed grammar.
Contract fragment: ?sort=created_at:desc&status=active validated against field and direction allow-lists; unknown fields 400.
Why: raw sort-field interpolation becomes SQL injection or full-scan ordering; allow-lists make intent explicit and indexable.
Misconfiguration avoided: sort parameter concatenated into ORDER BY.
Verification: injection battery on sort/filter params; unindexed-sort probe asserts 400 with guidance, not a slow query.

---

Design decision: Retries with backoff plus jitter, idempotent methods only.
Contract fragment: GET/HEAD/OPTIONS/PUT/DELETE retried up to 3 with exponential backoff and full jitter; POST retried only with idempotency keys.
Why: backoff spaces attempts, jitter desynchronizes clients, method discipline prevents retry-amplified duplication.
Versioning note: retry policy documented per endpoint class; changes announced because they alter client-visible behavior under failure.
Verification: fault-injection test asserts bounded attempts with spread timestamps; POST-without-key retry absence asserted in review.

---

Design decision: Timeouts per hop with a documented budget.
Contract fragment: connect 2s, read 10s on the edge; downstream calls carry their own tighter budgets summing under the edge budget.
Why: unbounded hops convert one slow dependency into pool exhaustion everywhere upstream.
Versioning note: timeout values versioned in config, changes reviewed like code.
Verification: slow-stub drill asserts 503 with the error contract at the bound; pool metrics flat during the drill.

---

Design decision: Circuit breakers with tuned thresholds, not defaults.
Contract fragment: open after 50% failures over 20 requests, half-open probe of 3, sleep window 30s — values from drill data.
Why: defaults trip on noise or never trip on real outages; tuned thresholds reflect the dependency's actual failure signature.
Versioning note: threshold changes deployed as config with before/after metrics attached.
Verification: fault-injection drill asserts open/probe/close transitions; metrics prove the tuned values against two incidents.

---

Design decision: Read-your-write windows for post-mutation reads.
Contract fragment: confirmation reads routed to primary for 5 seconds post-write, then replicas allowed.
Why: replication lag makes "order not found" the default post-checkout experience without a primary-read window.
Versioning note: window duration configurable; shortening it is safe, lengthening it costs read capacity and needs review.
Verification: post-write visibility test; window-expiry test asserts replica reads resume.

---

Design decision: Stale-while-revalidate boundaries stated per resource.
Contract fragment: Cache-Control: max-age=60, stale-while-revalidate=30 on reference data only.
Why: bounded staleness with background refresh beats thundering herds on expiry.
Versioning note: staleness budgets versioned; tightening is safe, loosening needs product sign-off.
Verification: expiry-storm test asserts single revalidation; staleness never exceeds the documented bound in tests.

---

Design decision: SSE for server-to-client streams with buffering discipline.
Contract fragment: text/event-stream with named events and ids, X-Accel-Buffering: no, proxy_buffering off,Last-Event-ID resume supported.
Why: SSE rides HTTP infrastructure (auth, TLS, proxies) that WebSockets renegotiate; buffering off keeps events live.
Versioning note: event names versioned; new fields additive, removal deprecated.
Verification: latency test asserts sub-200ms event delivery end to end; resume test replays from Last-Event-ID without gaps.

---

Design decision: WebSocket only for bidirectional low-latency needs.
Contract fragment: /ws/orders with auth at handshake, heartbeats every 25s, idle timeout 1h, backpressure via bounded server queues with drop-oldest policy.
Why: chat-like and live-collaboration patterns need two-way push; request/response APIs do not pay the connection-state cost.
Versioning note: message schemas versioned like REST bodies; handshake auth versioned with the API.
Verification: idle-socket test survives 10 minutes; backpressure drill asserts bounded memory with documented drop policy.

---

Design decision: Webhooks designed as untrusted inbound plus signed outbound.
Contract fragment: inbound receivers verify raw-byte HMAC with replay cache; outbound deliveries carry signatures, retry with backoff over 24h, then DLQ with alert.
Why: inbound webhooks are internet input; outbound webhooks need at-least-once semantics receivers can deduplicate.
Versioning note: signature scheme versioned (v0/v1 headers during rotation); payload versions follow the API versioning policy.
Verification: five-case delivery battery (unsigned, wrong secret, replay, tamper, timing) per receiver; outbound retry drill asserts delivery then quiescence.

---

Design decision: API-to-Kafka handoff with the outbox behind it.
Contract fragment: POST returns 202 with operation id; event lands via transactional outbox, relayed to Kafka; status endpoint tracks the operation.
Why: HTTP cannot transact with Kafka; the outbox bridges them with exactly the reliability both sides promise.
Versioning note: operation-status shapes versioned with the API; event schemas versioned with the topic.
Verification: crash-between-accept-and-publish drill shows the operation completing exactly once on recovery.

---

Design decision: Additive change discipline with a breaking-change checklist.
Contract fragment: new optional fields freely; new required fields, renames, removals, and semantic changes only in new versions.
Why: most "minor" breaks are semantic (stricter validation, changed defaults); the checklist catches what diffs miss.
Versioning note: checklist itself versioned; every release runs it.
Verification: breaking-diff CI job blocks unversioned breaks; semantic-change review item signed per release.

---

Design decision: Versioning strategy stated once for the whole API surface.
Contract fragment: media-type versions (application/vnd.acme.v2+json) with URI aliases during transition, sunset headers with dates, 410 past sunset.
Why: one strategy means one set of tooling (routing, tests, docs, sunset jobs) instead of per-team dialects.
Versioning note: the strategy document versioned; changing strategy is itself a breaking change with migration support.
Verification: strategy-conformance test per new endpoint (versioned, sunset-dated, converter-covered).

---

Design decision: Client migration windows with dual-serve periods.
Contract fragment: v1 and v2 serve together for two quarters; v1 responses carry Sunset and Deprecation headers from day one of v2.
Why: clients migrate on their schedules, not ours; headers make the deadline machine-readable.
Versioning note: window length committed per version; shortening needs the same process as breaking.
Verification: sunset test flips v1 to 410 after its date in staging; header presence asserted from v2 launch.

---

Design decision: BOLA design controls on every object route.
Contract fragment: ownership check at the service method every path funnels through; annotations as the outer ring; new overloads inherit by construction.
Why: per-route annotations alone are bypassed by the next overload; service-layer enforcement covers paths that do not exist yet.
Versioning note: control coverage asserted per version; new versions re-run the full matrix.
Verification: cross-tenant read matrix per endpoint version; forged-param battery green.

---

Design decision: BFLA design controls with default deny.
Contract fragment: role checks on every privileged handler; UI hiding as usability only; admin surface enumerated in the auth matrix.
Why: hidden buttons execute fine under direct calls; deny-by-default makes the safe state the lazy state.
Versioning note: role model changes versioned with migration notes for affected clients.
Verification: forbidden-verb matrix per admin route per version.

---

Design decision: Rate and quota caps as design inputs, not afterthoughts.
Contract fragment: per-principal quotas plus per-endpoint caps (page size 100, batch 50, payload sizes per route) published in docs and headers.
Why: capacity planning needs numbers; abuse control needs enforcement points chosen at design time.
Versioning note: tightening safe anytime; loosening reviewed for capacity impact.
Verification: cap+1 boundary tests per capped input; burst test in the nightly job.

---

Design decision: SSRF-safe outbound fetching for URL-accepting features.
Contract fragment: allow-listed destinations, per-hop IP validation with resolve-canonicalize-validate-connect, no credential ambient to the fetcher, redirect chains bounded.
Why: server-side requests inherit server network position; validation once at input misses redirect and rebinding time-of-use changes.
Versioning note: allow-list changes reviewed; fetcher behavior covered by the same contract tests across versions.
Verification: six-case SSRF battery per URL-accepting feature; new URL-accepting feature extends it or review fails.

---

Design decision: Unsafe-consumption validation for every third-party response.
Contract fragment: strict schema validation, timeouts with backoff, signature verification where offered, secrets server-side only, degraded-mode behavior specified.
Why: providers are untrusted input with SLAs; their outages and compromises become ours without validation boundaries.
Versioning note: provider-version pins recorded; provider upgrades re-run validation tests.
Verification: hostile-fixture battery per integration (wrong types, huge numbers, extra fields); fault-injection timeout suite.

---

Design decision: Timeouts, pagination, and payload caps composed into a resource budget per endpoint.
Contract fragment: documented budget table (max payload, max page, timeout, quota cost) published per route class.
Why: endpoints have finite cost envelopes; the budget makes cost reviewable at design time instead of discovered in incidents.
Versioning note: budget tightening safe; loosening needs capacity sign-off.
Verification: budget-conformance test per route class; overload drill asserts bounded behavior (errors or shedding, never OOM).

---

Design decision: Request tracing headers required, response headers minimal.
Contract fragment: clients send traceparent plus idempotency key where applicable; responses carry requestId, rate headers, and nothing identifying internals (no server versions, no stack names).
Why: debuggability flows one way (in), information disclosure flows the other; minimal responses leak nothing to fingerprint.
Versioning note: header additions additive; header removals announced (someone always parses them).
Verification: fingerprint probe asserts no version leakage; trace-join drill across gateway and service.

---

Design decision: OPTIONS and HEAD handled correctly as non-mutating infrastructure.
Contract fragment: OPTIONS answers CORS preflight with the configured policy; HEAD mirrors GET headers without a body; neither ever mutates.
Why: preflight is browser negotiation, not an action; HEAD exists for clients checking size and freshness.
Versioning note: preflight policy versioned with CORS config; HEAD behavior stable across versions.
Verification: preflight test per CORS deployment; HEAD-vs-GET header equality test; mutation attempt via either asserted inert.

---

Design decision: Content negotiation with a default that never surprises.
Contract fragment: Accept: application/json default; versioned media types honored; unacceptable types get 406 with the offered list.
Why: clients that send no Accept header outnumber those that do; the default must be the common case, not an error.
Versioning note: new representations additive; default representation changes are breaking.
Verification: no-Accept test asserts JSON; unacceptable-type test asserts 406 with alternatives listed.

---

Design decision: Long-running work returns 202 with pollable status, never held connections.
Contract fragment: POST /exports returns 202 plus Operation: /operations/{id}; GET /operations/{id} reports queued/running/done/failed with result links.
Why: held connections couple client patience to job duration; pollable operations survive deploys, retries, and impatient clients.
Versioning note: operation shapes versioned with the API; terminal states stable across versions.
Verification: deploy-during-operation drill completes the job; client-disconnect drill shows no orphaned work.

---

Design decision: front REST/SSE on HTTP/3 with a fallback, instead of a hard upgrade.
Contract or config fragment:
listen 443 ssl;
listen 443 quic;
http3 on;
add_header Alt-Svc 'h3=":443"; ma=86400' always;
Why: H/3's QUIC transport removes TCP head-of-line blocking for the event streams this API serves, but clients fail the h3 handshake as often as they succeed on the first attempt; without the Alt-Svc advertisement and the H/2 fallback, a third of clients burn a full connect timeout on every session. This failure mode is invisible without per-hop timeout budgets, so the budget belongs in the client config.
Versioning/compat note: H/3 fallback must advertise H/2 and H/1.1 on the same origin so old clients transparently downgrade.
Verification: synthetic probe: 1,000 clients, zero sessions that never connect; H/2 and H/1.1 fallbacks counted in the edge dashboard.

---

Design decision: use HTTP message signatures (RFC 9421) instead of a bespoke X-Signature header for webhook and outbound-request integrity.
Contract or config fragment:
Signature-Input: sig1=("@method" "@path" "content-digest");created=1735689600;nonce="abc123";keyid="hook-01";alg="hmac-sha256"
Signature: sig1=:...base64...
Why: the bespoke HMAC scheme signs only the body, so method, path, and timestamp are replayable independently — a client that lifts the signature header replays the same call against a different path. RFC 9421 covers the request line and the content-digest, closing that. The failure it prevents is a signed webhook header replayed against a different endpoint or stripped of timestamp.
Versioning/compat note: key rotation publishes both old and new keyids in Signature-Input until the clock-skewed verification window closes; docs distinguish the canonical-path form for proxies.
Verification: integration test replays a captured Signature-Input against a different path and must fail with 401; a stripped content-digest fails with the documented error.

---

Design decision: treat IETF RateLimit headers as a draft until RFC, never as the sole signal.
Contract or config fragment:
RateLimit-Limit: 100
RateLimit-Remaining: 41
RateLimit-Reset: 780
Plus the historical X-RateLimit-* trio preserved in parallel until at least one full deprecation window.
Why: RateLimit/RateLimit-Policy are at draft-v11 with a moving syntax; shipping them as the only client contract means a draft refresh silently changes what clients parse. The old trio had documented reset semantics because the API owned them. The failure this prevents is treating an IETF draft as settled — the corpus marks this labeled draft, never settled.
Versioning/compat note: both header families ship in parallel until Sunset on the legacy trio; the deprecation window is named in the contract doc.
Verification: contract test asserts both families present and consistent on every 429 and on every 200.

---

Design decision: cache tiers are explicit per route, never assumed by a library.
Contract or config fragment:
Cache-Control: private, max-age=30        # session-scoped user payloads
Cache-Control: public, max-age=300, stale-while-revalidate=600   # catalog reads
Why: RFC 9111 lets stale-while-revalidate serve one stale response while revalidating — that is a UX win for catalog, a data-integrity loss for session state. The failure mode is cargo-culting the same Cache-Control onto user-specific and shared payloads alike.
Versioning/compat note: when the cache key changes (e.g., adding a user dimension), the ETag and the Cache-Control tier must move together or conditional requests never validate.
Verification: a probe asserts the user-specific route never returns a shared Cache-Control; a concurrent stale-while-revalidate window yields exactly one stale response per key.

---

Legacy: X-RateLimit-* headers on 200s only, with no reset semantics agreed with clients.
Replacement: IETF draft-v11 RateLimit/RateLimit-Policy alongside the legacy trio through a full deprecation window.
Symptom: Client libraries silently wait on a different source of truth and schedule retries against a limit the server no longer enforces.

---

Legacy: A bespoke `X-Signature` header wrapping a body-only HMAC.
Replacement: RFC 9421 message signatures binding method, path, and content digest.
Symptom: A captured signature header replays successfully against a different path, because only the body was covered.

---

Design decision: a request that cannot finish inside the request budget returns an operation, not a longer timeout.
Contract fragment:
POST /reports  -> 202 Accepted
                 Location: /operations/op_7f3
                 Retry-After: 5
GET  /operations/op_7f3 -> { "status": "in_progress" | "succeeded" | "failed",
                             "result": "/reports/r_88", "error": { "code": "source.timeout" } }
HEAD /reports/r_88 -> 200 with Content-Length once ready; 404 while not yet visible
`Location: /operations/op_7f3` and `Retry-After: 5` on the 202, then `Link: <https://api.test/reports/r_88>; rel="result"` on the finished operation — three headers that let a client poll, back off and leave without parsing prose.
Why: 202 with an operation resource moves the wait out of the connection, so a slow report costs a poll rather than a gateway timeout and a client that disappears does not cancel the work by accident. `Retry-After` gives the poller a server-supplied cadence, and the `Location` of the result is separate from the operation's own URI so the result can be cached or downloaded once while the operation record stays queryable.
Versioning note: the operation shape is part of the contract — add fields freely, never change what `status` values mean, and give each terminal failure a stable code so clients can branch on it instead of parsing prose.
Verification: contract test asserts 202 plus a resolvable `Location`; a test drives an operation to each terminal state; the polling client honours `Retry-After` in a fake-clock test rather than hard-coding a sleep.

---

Design decision: a batch endpoint states its partial-failure semantics, because "some succeeded" is a different contract from "all or nothing".
Contract fragment:
POST /orders:batch  { "requests": [ … ], "onError": "continue" | "rollback" }
-> 200 with { "results": [ { "status": 201, "id": "o_1" }, { "status": 422, "code": "line.sku_unknown" } ] }
-> or 207 with per-item bodies where content types differ; 422 only when the envelope itself is bad
Why: per-item status codes with per-item stable error codes let a client retry the failed subset safely, which requires each item to carry its own idempotency key. Deciding inside the request (`onError`) beats a house convention, because the two modes have different cost: rollback needs a transaction around everything, continue needs each item to be independently idempotent.
Versioning note: the envelope is additive territory; the item shape is the compatible surface, so a new item-level error code is a minor change and a changed meaning for `status` is not.
Verification: contract test covers all-accepted, mixed, and envelope-invalid; a retry test resends only the failed subset with the same keys and asserts no duplicate side effects; the size cap returns 413 with a stated limit rather than an arbitrary 400.

---

Design decision: correlation and trace context are part of the API, documented and echoed, not an internal logging habit.
Contract fragment:
traceparent: 00-4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736-00f067aa0ba902b7-01
request-id: req_01HTZ…            (client-generated, echoed in every response and in every error body)
Retry-After: 2
Why: a support ticket arrives with one identifier from one system, and the whole diagnosis is whether that identifier reaches the other systems. Echoing the client's request id in the response and in the problem-details body turns "which request?" into a lookup. Trace context propagates by the standard header so intermediaries cooperate, and the request id exists because a trace id is opaque and nobody quotes it in a ticket.
Versioning note: header names are contract. Renaming one is breaking for the clients that already parse it, so both are accepted during a window and the removal is announced the way any other sunset is.
Verification: contract test asserts the echoed id on 2xx and on 4xx/5xx, and an integration test asserts one id resolves across gateway and service logs (schema in 20); the client library sets and reads both headers by construction, so no call site has to remember.

---

Design decision: retries get a budget and hedging is a policy, both expressed per endpoint rather than per call site.
Contract fragment:
{ "endpoint": "GET /stock/{sku}",
  "timeoutMs": 120, "maxAttempts": 3, "backoffMs": [30, 90], "jitter": true,
  "retryOn": ["connect-error", "429", "503"], "budgetRatio": 0.10,
  "hedge": { "enabled": true, "percentile": 0.75, "maxInFlight": 2 } }
Why: retries that ignore each other are how a small dependency error becomes a self-inflicted storm, so the budget — retries as a fraction of total requests — caps the amplification, and only idempotent, timeout-or-overload conditions are retryable. Hedging a read at the p75 latency is cheaper than a longer timeout for the tail, but only for reads that are cheap to duplicate; hedging a write is a duplicate-side-effect design decision, not a tuning knob.
Versioning note: budgets belong to the client's contract with itself, so they change without a version bump — but the `Retry-After` semantics the server sends are contract and must not be silently ignored by a client that has its own cadence.
Verification: a fault-injection test with the dependency at 30% failure asserts the retry ratio stays inside the budget and the additional load is what the model predicts; a test with a slow p99 asserts hedged reads return at about p75 without exceeding `maxInFlight` (the pattern's architectural framing is 19, the failure transcripts are 02).

---

Design decision: Call the backend same-origin with relative paths and no base URL.
Contract fragment:
API_BASE = ''
POST /login/password with { email, password } and credentials include plus Accept application/json
Vite dev proxies BACKEND_PATHS = ['/login/', '/csrf', '/webauthn/'] to https://api.example.test with changeOrigin false, nginx does the same in prod
Why: no CORS, no preflight, no stored base URL to drift between environments, and the session cookie stays HttpOnly with nothing in JS to steal. The proxy list is the contract of which paths are backend, so a new backend path must gain an entry or the SPA serves it as a route.
Versioning note: adding a path to BACKEND_PATHS is additive; removing one is breaking for bookmarked emailed links and gets a redirect, not a silent 404.
Verification: a contract test asserting every fetch path starts with / and no absolute backend host appears in the bundle, plus a proxy test asserting a new path without an entry serves the SPA shell in dev.

---

Design decision: Parse a refusal as a problem only when the body can be one.
Contract fragment:
if (!res.ok) {
  if (/[/+]json/.test(contentType)) problem = await res.json() as ProblemDetail
  throw new ApiError(res.status, problem)
}
Why: the rate limiter answers 429 as text/plain and a proxy answers 502 as HTML, neither of which is a typed refusal. Checking Content-Type before parsing keeps those from becoming a JSON SyntaxError that hides the real status, while a JSON problem keeps its type plus detail for the page to branch on.
Versioning note: the problem shape may add fields but never renames type or detail; clients ignore unknown members, which is why the type holds an index signature.
Verification: a test with 429 text/plain asserting ApiError with problem undefined and the rate-limit sentence rendered, plus a 502 HTML test asserting the generic fallback rather than a parse throw.

---

Design decision: Treat empty 2xx as success with no body, and malformed 2xx as a refusal.
Contract fragment:
const text = await res.text()
if (!text) return undefined as T
try { return JSON.parse(text) as T } catch { throw new ApiError(res.status) }
Endpoints: POST /login/magic-link returns 202 empty, POST /signin/change-password returns 204 empty, POST /login/password returns 200 JSON
Why: 202 and 204 have no body by design, and res.json on an empty body throws, so text-first reading makes the three success shapes uniform for callers. A 200 with a corrupted body from a middlebox surfaces as an ApiError on the same path as any other failure, which the page already knows how to render.
Versioning note: changing a 202 to return a body is additive if callers already accept undefined; changing a 200 to 204 is breaking for callers that parse unconditionally.
Verification: tests over 202 empty, 204 empty, 200 JSON, and 200 with truncated JSON asserting undefined, undefined, parsed, and ApiError respectively.

---

Design decision: Deliver CSRF as a body token replayed under its own header name, not as a cookie.
Contract fragment:
GET /csrf returns { headerName, token }
POST /webauthn/customer/register with headers { headerName: token } plus Content-Type and Accept JSON
Pre-auth credential endpoints are CSRF-exempt and send no token
Why: the login chain spans hosts where a cookie set by one host is not readable on another, so the double-submit cookie pattern cannot work. The server names the header per deployment, so the client replays exactly what it was given rather than a hardcoded X-CSRF-TOKEN that drifts.
Versioning note: renaming the header is transparent because the name travels in the GET body; adding CSRF to a currently exempt endpoint is breaking for old clients and ships with a versioned path.
Verification: a test asserting the register POST carries the exact header name from GET /csrf, plus a test asserting pre-auth endpoints send no CSRF header at all.

---

Design decision: Branch refusals only on the stable type URI, and render detail verbatim.
Contract fragment:
{ type: 'urn:example:problem:invalid-fields', status: 422, detail: 'Check the highlighted fields.', errors: [{ field: 'email', message: 'Already in use.' }] }
Pages map type to behavior: email-not-verified offers a resend, invalid-fields renders per-field faults, everything else renders detail; title is never shown
Why: detail is worded for display and may be reworded, while type is the contract that never renames. Branching on wording or on status alone breaks the resend offer the next time the copy changes, and showing title leaks the HTTP reason instead of a sentence.
Versioning note: the server may add kinds but never renames or reuses a slug; unknown types render their detail, so new kinds degrade to a readable refusal on old clients.
Verification: contract tests per handled type plus one unknown-type test asserting detail renders with no offer, plus a wording-change test asserting behavior unchanged when detail text moves.

---

Design decision: Answer enumeration-sensitive writes with 202 and uniform wording, and answer abuse with 429 outside the problem shape.
Contract fragment:
POST /login/signup returns 202 empty for any address, known or not
POST /login/resend-verification returns 202 empty for any address
429 returns text/plain with Retry-After, no problem body
Client wording for sent: If that address is waiting for confirmation, a new link is on its way
Why: the timing and the body say nothing about whether the address exists, so the address book cannot be rebuilt from responses. Rate limiting stays outside the typed shape because it is about the caller, not the account, and the client words it locally instead of parsing it.
Versioning note: changing a 202 to return per-address truth would be a security regression, not a feature; adding a problem body to 429 is additive only if clients keep their local sentence as fallback.
Verification: tests posting unknown versus known addresses asserting identical 202 empty plus identical sent wording, and a 429 test asserting the cooldown sentence with Retry-After honored and no retry fired.

---

Design decision: Keep pages and endpoints on disjoint paths of one origin.
Contract fragment:
Pages live under /account/ with base /account/, endpoints at the root: POST /reset-password, POST /accept-invitation/preview, POST /signin/password
BACKEND_PATHS = ['/forgot-password', '/reset-password', '/accept-invitation', '/verify-email-change', '/signin']
Vite proxies exactly those to http://localhost:8080 with changeOrigin false, nginx holds one location for /account/
Why: GETs under /account/ can never collide with POSTs at the root, so the router and the backend never fight over a path and there is no CORS to misconfigure. The backend must see the browser host for its host-based chains, which is what changeOrigin false preserves.
Versioning note: adding a BACKEND_PATHS entry is additive; moving an endpoint under /account/ would collide with the SPA shell and needs a new major path.
Verification: a test asserting no SPA route starts with any BACKEND_PATHS prefix, plus a dev-proxy test asserting an unlisted backend path serves the SPA instead of the API.

---

Design decision: Exempt emailed-link posts from CSRF and require it for sign-in writes.
Contract fragment:
No token: POST /reset-password { token, newPassword }, POST /accept-invitation/preview { token }
With fresh GET /signin/csrf per write: POST /signin/password, POST /signin/magic-link/consume, DELETE /signin/passkeys
Why: what authorizes an emailed-link call is the one-time token a forging site cannot know, so CSRF adds nothing; what authorizes a sign-in write is the session cookie the browser attaches to any request, so a forged sign-in would land the victim in the attacker's account without it. Fetching CSRF fresh per write tracks session renewal, where a cached token would 403.
Versioning note: adding CSRF to an exempt endpoint breaks old emailed links still in inboxes; removing it from a sign-in write is a security regression, not a cleanup.
Verification: tests asserting emailed-link posts carry no CSRF header while sign-in writes carry the header from GET /signin/csrf, plus a test asserting a forged cross-origin POST without the token fails.

---

Design decision: Word 4xx from the backend and 5xx locally, with 429 as its own sentence.
Contract fragment:
if (res.status === 429) return new ApiError(429, TOO_MANY)
body = await res.json() catch undefined
message = res.status < 500 ? (problem?.detail ?? FAILED) : FAILED
Only detail is shown, title is never rendered
Why: a 4xx sentence describes what the operator did and can be shown, while a 5xx body is for logs and showing it leaks internals. The 429 comes from the limiter as plain text with no problem, so the client owns that one sentence and honors the cooldown instead of retrying into it.
Versioning note: the backend may reword any detail without breaking clients because they branch on type; changing a 4xx to a 5xx flips which sentence shows and is treated as breaking for copy-sensitive flows.
Verification: tests over 422 with detail, 429 plain, 502 HTML, and offline TypeError asserting backend sentence, cooldown sentence, generic sentence, and unreachable sentence respectively.

---

Design decision: Retry a write once on 403 after refreshing the body-token, then stop.
Contract fragment:
let res = await attempt();
if (res.status === 403) { clearCsrf(); res = await attempt(); }
if (res.status === 401) { signInRedirect(); throw new ApiError(401, 'Signing you in…'); }
GET /csrf returns { headerName, token } with a differently masked token each time unmasking to the same value
Why: the token is tied to the session and the session can renew between page load and submit, so one stale-token 403 is expected and worth one retry. A second 403 is a real refusal, and treating it as stale would loop a forbidden admin into useless fetches while hiding the message.
Versioning note: the header name travels in the GET body, so renaming it needs no client change; adding a second retry would turn a permission denial into amplified load.
Verification: a test with 403 then 200 asserting two writes plus one CSRF refetch, plus a test with 403 then 403 asserting the refusal renders with no third attempt.

---

Design decision: Put the origin in the query string for DELETE.
Contract fragment:
POST /admin/tenants/{id}/origins with { origin }
DELETE /admin/tenants/{id}/origins?origin=https%3A%2F%2Fshop.example.test
Why: an origin contains :// plus dots, which make poor path segments and worse router matches, while a query value round-trips exactly with one encode. The POST carries JSON for the create path and the DELETE carries the same string as a value, so both sides normalize once.
Versioning note: moving the value into the path would need double-encoding rules for slashes; keeping it in the query keeps the route table flat.
Verification: contract tests asserting the DELETE URL encodes :// once and decodes to the identical string server-side, plus a test asserting an origin with a trailing slash does not match its bare sibling.

---

Design decision: Serve the console from one origin with an explicit backend path list.
Contract fragment:
BACKEND_PATHS = ['/admin/', '/csrf', '/oauth2/', '/login/oauth2/', '/logout']
SPA routes never start with those prefixes, vite proxies them with changeOrigin false, nginx forwards them in prod
GET /admin/me gates the shell: 401 redirects to sign-in with return-to, 403 shows signed-in non-admin warning
Why: one origin means no CORS and cookies just work, while the list is the choke that keeps app routes from shadowing JSON. Remembering return-to client-side works around the admin chain remembering no JSON request, which once landed sign-in on raw /admin/me after login.
Versioning note: adding a backend path is additive if the SPA route ban grows with it; removing one needs the SPA ban to stay until bookmarks expire.
Verification: a test asserting no SPA route collides with any BACKEND_PATHS prefix, plus 401 and 403 gate tests asserting redirect versus warning with no data fetch on the wrong branch.
