Signal needed: request-scoped debugability across gateway and services.
Schema:
{"ts": "2026-10-02T21:00:00Z", "level": "info", "service": "users", "route": "GET /users", "tenant": "acme", "ms": 41, "requestId": "req_9f2"}
Incident reading: filter by requestId to replay one user's failing journey across all services in time order.
Anti-pattern: plaintext multi-format logs where the request id appears in four spellings (reqId, request_id, rid, none).
Verification: schema-conformance test on every log line in tests; incident drill joins traces across gateway and service on one key.

---

Signal needed: field allow-listing that keeps secrets out of telemetry by construction.
Schema: ts, level, service, route, tenant, ms, requestId — plus per-endpoint allow-listed business fields, nothing else.
Incident reading: every line safe to show on a screen share; no redaction scramble during incidents.
Anti-pattern: "log everything as JSON" first version carrying Authorization headers and tokens into Splunk for a year.
Verification: redaction test fails the build on credential-shaped values; sampled production logs scanned nightly.

---

Signal needed: RED metrics per service out of the box.
Schema: rate (requests/s), errors (fraction 5xx plus business-error codes), duration (histogram with p50/p95/p99) — labeled by service, route template (never raw ids), and version.
Incident reading: rate drop plus error spike plus duration shift triangulate deploy faults vs dependency faults vs traffic shifts in one glance.
Anti-pattern: per-userId and per-URL labels exploding cardinality to millions of series, metrics backend falling over during the incident it should illuminate.
Verification: cardinality budget test on label sets; route-template (not raw-path) assertion per metric.

---

Signal needed: USE metrics per resource (pools, queues, disks, brokers).
Schema: utilization (percent saturation), saturation (queue depth/wait time), errors (timeout/exhaustion counts) for Hikari pools, Kafka consumer lag, disk volumes, connection counts.
`{"@timestamp":"2026-10-07T02:14:05.412Z","log.level":"WARN","service.name":"orders-api","process.thread.name":"virtual-41","logger":"com.zaxxer.hikari.pool.HikariPool","message":"Connection is not available, request timed out after 30000ms (total=10, active=10, idle=0, waiting=41)"}`
Saturation arriving as a user-facing timeout three layers later: the pool log is the cause, the SLO burn is the symptom, and the pair is only readable because both carry `service.name` and a trace id.
Incident reading: saturation rising while utilization looks fine names the queue as the bottleneck before latency alarms fire.
Anti-pattern: CPU-only dashboards declaring "all green" during a pool-exhaustion outage.
Verification: saturation alert per resource with runbook; pool-exhaustion drill fires the right alert, not a generic page.

---

Signal needed: histogram discipline replacing averaged latencies.
Schema: Prometheus-style histograms (or DDSketch) with p50/p95/p99 computed at query time; never pre-averaged means.
Incident reading: bimodal distributions (cache hit/miss) visible as two humps; means would report a valley nobody experiences.
Anti-pattern: "average 40ms" SLA that 9% of users experience as 180ms.
Verification: dashboard review bans mean-latency panels; bimodality drill (cache outage) shows the split explicitly.

---

Signal needed: traceparent propagation across HTTP and Kafka boundaries.
Schema: W3C traceparent plus tenant-scoped correlation id on inbound headers, outbound calls, and record headers.
Incident reading: one trace shows gateway → service → database → Kafka → consumer as a single timeline with the slow span highlighted.
Anti-pattern: per-service trace ids that cannot join, incident response as five separate timelines narrated over a call.
Verification: propagation test per boundary (header present and valid downstream); incident drill joins the full path on one key.

---

Signal needed: span naming that survives aggregation.
Schema: low-cardinality operation names (GET /users, orders.consume, db.query.users_by_tenant) with high-cardinality data as attributes, never in names.
Incident reading: slow-operation ranking meaningful across thousands of distinct parameter values.
Anti-pattern: span per URL with raw ids — million-span cardinality, aggregation useless.
Verification: span-name audit (template, not raw); cardinality budget on span names like metrics.

---

Signal needed: sampling strategy with head rules plus tail retention.
Schema: head sampling at a sustainable base rate; tail-based retention keeping all errors, slow traces, and sampled successes.
Why this shape: head-only sampling drops the exact traces incidents need; tail rules keep errors and outliers while bounding cost.
Anti-pattern: 100% retention "temporarily" producing a telemetry bill larger than production.
Verification: error-trace completeness test (every error id traceable); cost-per-trace trended with a budget.

---

Signal needed: exemplars linking metrics to traces.
Schema: histogram buckets carrying exemplar trace ids for slow observations.
`http_server_request_duration_seconds_bucket{otel_scope_name="orders-api",http_route="/v1/orders/{id}",le="0.25"} 412 # {trace_id="4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736",span_id="00f067aa0ba902b7"} 0.248331`
The exposition line is the feature: sample the bucket, get a trace id you can open, no extra sampling budget.
receivers: { otlp: { protocols: { http: { endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318" } } } }
processors: { memory_limiter: { limit_mib: 1024 }, batch: { send_batch_size: 8192 } }
exporters: { otlphttp: { endpoint: "https://telemetry.test:4318" } }
The collector's own config is telemetry infrastructure and gets reviewed like it: an unset memory limiter is how a trace pipeline takes down the node it runs on.
Incident reading: click the p99 bucket, land on the exact slow trace — metric-to-trace in one hop instead of time-range guessing.
Anti-pattern: metrics and traces as parallel universes joined by timestamps and hope.
Verification: exemplar presence test on histogram metrics; drill measures metric-to-trace time under a minute.

---

Signal needed: SLI selection that reflects user pain.
Schema: availability (valid responses over total per route class), latency (p95 under threshold per class), freshness (data age for read models).
Incident reading: SLI burn names what users feel; raw error counts name what operators see — related but different.
Anti-pattern: SLI on CPU utilization ("99% available compute") while checkout fails for an hour.
Verification: SLI-to-incident mapping review (each past incident would have burned the SLI); user-report correlation spot-checked.

---

Signal needed: error-budget policy gating deploys.
Schema: burn-rate alerts (fast burn pages, slow burn tickets) wired into the deploy pipeline; freeze on fast burn.
- alert: OrdersApiAvailabilityFastBurn
  expr: (sum(rate(slo:http_requests_good{service="orders-api"}[5m])) / sum(rate(slo:http_requests_total{service="orders-api"}[5m]))) < 0.99856
  for: 5m
  labels: {severity: page, slo: orders-api-availability, burn_rate: "14.4x", window: "1h/5m"}
  annotations: {runbook: "https://runbooks.test/orders-api-availability", request_page: "oncall-platform"}
The `burn_rate` and `window` labels are what let one routing table separate page from ticket without four copies of the same expression.
management.tracing.sampling.probability=0.05
management.otlp.tracing.endpoint=https://otel-collector.test:4318/v1/traces
logging.pattern.level=%5p [${baggage.tenant:unknown},%X{traceId:-},%X{spanId:-}]
management.opentelemetry.resource-attributes.service.name=orders-api
The properties that decide whether the three signals join up at all: one sampler setting, one export endpoint, one log pattern carrying the ids, one resource attribute naming the service.
Why: deploys during active incidents compound; the pipeline must know the service is already bleeding.
Anti-pattern: deploy train running through a SEV with nobody connecting the two systems.
Verification: simulated-burn drill asserts the freeze triggers; deploy log shows the gate decision per release.

---

Signal needed: symptom-based alerts with runbooks attached.
Schema: alert on checkout-error-rate and p95-latency (symptoms), not on CPU or disk alone (causes); every alert links its runbook with the first three steps.
Why: symptom alerts fire when users hurt; cause alerts fire constantly about things that do not matter yet.
Anti-pattern: 40 cause-based alerts muted within a week, the real incident paging into a muted channel.
Verification: alert-firing drill per rule quarterly; mute events reviewed as process failures; runbook step-one executable by any on-call.

---

Signal needed: page-vs-ticket routing tuned from drill data.
Schema: user-impacting symptom breaches page; degradation trends and capacity warnings ticket; everything else logs.
Why: paging is a scarce resource spent from on-call attention; misrouted pages train ignoring.
Anti-pattern: disk-70%-full pages at 3am for a volume that fills in three weeks.
Verification: routing review per alert with past-page analysis (was a page warranted?); paging volume trended per service.

---

Signal needed: continuous JFR in production at bounded overhead.
Schema: always-on recording (allocation, lock contention, I/O, pinned virtual threads) with 24h retention, under 2% overhead budget.
Incident reading: the profile for last Tuesday's incident already exists — no reproduction needed, analysis starts immediately.
Anti-pattern: "enable profiling and wait for it to happen again" as the incident strategy.
Verification: overhead budget asserted in load tests; event-set review (allocation/lock/IO/pinning present); retention drill retrieves a week-old incident profile.

---

Signal needed: flame-graph reading discipline for CPU and wall time.
Schema: wall-clock graphs for latency ("where does time go"), CPU graphs for efficiency ("what burns cycles"), kept distinct and labeled.
Why: CPU graphs hide waiting (locks, I/O, GC); wall graphs hide burn granularity; incidents need the right one first.
Anti-pattern: CPU flame graph "proving" no bottleneck during a lock-contention outage.
Verification: graph-type labeled per investigation runbook step; lock-contention drill resolved from the wall graph, not CPU.

---

Signal needed: heap and thread dumps paired, never alone.
Schema: two heap dumps plus JFR allocation profile for leaks; thread dump plus lock-order documentation for deadlocks; virtual-thread sections included on JDK 25.
Why: single dumps answer "what exists now", never rate or trend; pairs plus profiles answer "what grows" and "who waits on whom".
Anti-pattern: one heap dump "proving" a leak, followed by a restart that destroys the evidence.
Verification: leak-diagnosis runbook requires the pair plus profile; deadlock runbook pairs the dump with lock-order docs.

---

Signal needed: secret-shaped value scanning across telemetry.
Schema: nightly scan of logs, trace attributes, metric labels, and APM custom fields for credential, token, and key patterns.
Why: telemetry aggregates secrets from every service; one unredacted field upstream contaminates every downstream store.
Anti-pattern: redaction tested at the logger while APM attributes carry the same token unexamined.
Verification: scan findings routed by exposure tier; attribute-schema allow-list reviewed per new instrumented field.

---

Signal needed: PII minimization with purpose-bound retention.
Schema: user identifiers hashed or truncated in telemetry by default; raw values only in explicitly approved debug scopes with expiry.
Why: telemetry becomes a PII store subject to erasure requests and breach scope; minimization shrinks both.
Anti-pattern: full emails and IPs in every log line "for debugging", retained for a year.
Verification: PII-field audit per schema; retention policy per data class with automatic expiry asserted.

---

Signal needed: tenant-scoped access to telemetry itself.
Schema: dashboard and log-query permissions partitioned by tenant for multi-tenant operations teams; support views masked by default.
Why: telemetry contains tenant data; unscoped access lets support read any tenant's records without a trace.
Anti-pattern: one shared Grafana with all tenants' logs queryable by everyone with the link.
Verification: cross-tenant telemetry probe denied; support-access audit log reviewed.

---

Signal needed: audit of who viewed telemetry and when.
Schema: access log on sensitive dashboards and log queries (who, what filter, when), retained per compliance policy.
Why: telemetry access is itself a privileged action on customer data; unaudited access is unscoped access with extra steps.
Anti-pattern: "read-only, so no audit needed" while support browses payment logs freely.
Verification: audit-log presence test on sensitive views; quarterly access review against ticket references.

---

Signal needed: deployment markers on every dashboard and trace view.
Schema: deploy events (version, time, author, change link) overlaid on metrics and available as trace attributes.
Why: most regressions start at a deploy; markers turn "when did it break" from archaeology into glancing.
Anti-pattern: correlating incident start with deploy times from chat history.
Verification: marker presence test per deploy pipeline; drill measures time-to-suspect-deploy under two minutes.

---

Signal needed: synthetic probes for user-visible availability.
Schema: scripted critical flows (login, search, checkout-read) running every minute from two regions, asserting outcomes plus contract shapes.
Why: internal metrics stay green while the CDN, DNS, or edge config breaks real users; probes see what users see.
Anti-pattern: "all dashboards green" during a DNS outage nobody internal notices for an hour.
Verification: probe failures page with the failing step named; probe maintenance (selector updates) owned per flow.

---

Signal needed: capacity headroom visibility before it matters.
Schema: headroom panels (peak-to-ceiling ratios for pools, partitions, disks, quotas) with trend slopes, not just current values.
Why: exhaustion incidents announce themselves weeks early in slopes; point values hide the trajectory.
Anti-pattern: disk-at-90% discovered Friday evening with Monday's growth unplanned.
Verification: headroom review weekly with slope annotations; ceiling-approach alerts fire with weeks of lead, not hours.

---

Signal needed: error-budget consumption attribution per change.
Schema: deploy-linked burn attribution (which release consumed how much budget) in the release record.
Why: accountability without blame — the data shows which changes cost reliability, informing the next design.
Anti-pattern: budgets burning with no link to causes, reviewed as weather rather than feedback.
Verification: release record carries burn delta; repeated burners trigger design review, not just rollback.

---

Signal needed: boot-up observability that works before app code runs, on the same baseline as production.
Config fragment: the spring-boot-starter-opentelemetry starter, with the 4.1 environment-variable support for OTLP endpoints so one container image targets any OTLP receiver by env alone.
Schema or config fragment:
OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=https://otel.internal:4318
OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=users-svc
How it reads in an incident: the very first boot after deploy already carries the service name, which is the only way to attribute a startup regression to the right pod.
Anti-pattern: egressing per-signal to three different agents, each with its own queue and its own failure mode.
Verification: a pod restart renders spans to the staging receiver within one heartbeat; the dashboard for the new service name appears without any application change.

---

Signal needed: correlate tenant context between logs and traces without smuggling PII across a trust boundary.
Schema or config fragment: tenant_id travels in the server-timing/trace attributes set from the gateway; baggage is never populated with tenant or user identifiers.
How it reads in an incident: every log line carries the same tenant field as the span attribute, so a drill query filters by tenant once and hits both signals.
Anti-pattern: tenant id in W3C baggage — baggage propagates to every outbound call including third parties, leaking tenancy where it should never reach.
Verification: a test that boots the gateway and spans two outbound calls asserts no tenant key appears in the W3C baggage header.

---

Signal needed: A trace that was sampled out still has to explain a latency spike, and the metric alone cannot name a request.
Schema:
histogram buckets (seconds): 0.010 0.025 0.050 0.100 0.250 0.500 1.000 2.500
exemplars: enabled on histogram buckets, attaching trace_id to one observation per bucket per interval
cardinality ledger (labels): service, endpoint (templated), method, status_class, outcome  -> 5 labels, no tenant, no user, no order id
sample rate: head-based 1% baseline, 100% for errors and for any request exceeding the SLO threshold, tail-sampled on the gateway
Why: exemplars are how a dashboard point becomes a trace without raising the sample rate for everything, and bucket edges that straddle the SLO threshold are what make "we breached" measurable rather than interpolated. The cardinality ledger exists because a label is a multiplication: tenant with thousands of values on a five-label histogram is how a metrics backend starts dropping ingests and dashboards go sparse at exactly the wrong moment.
Anti-pattern: a `tenant_id` label on every metric "for now"; buckets copied from a library default that stop at 1s while the SLO is 2.5s; a high sample rate everywhere, which is a pay-per-GB decision disguised as an observability one.
Verification: exemplars resolve to a real trace for a request chosen from the dashboard's slowest bucket; the metrics backend reports the series count per metric against the ledger and alerts on growth; a test asserts a new label requires an entry in the ledger file.

---

Signal needed: Saturation that shows up as a latency symptom three layers away, seen before the SLO burns.
Schema:
USE per resource, reported together:
  cpu:        utilisation, run queue length, nr_throttled deltas, pressure stall information
  memory:     working set, majfault, oom_kill counter, swap use
  disk:       busy time, io latency distribution, queue depth
  pool:       in-use, max, wait time distribution, acquisition timeout count
  queue:      consumer lag, oldest-message age, per-partition skew
paired with: RED per endpoint, so the pair answers both "is the user hurting" and "which resource is short"
Why: RED watches the symptom, USE watches the cause, and the incident is cheap when both are on one screen and expensive when an on-call has to infer one from the other. Pressure stall information and run-queue length detect contention that average CPU utilisation hides, which is why a node can look idle while requests crawl.
Anti-pattern: utilisation averages over a node rather than per container or per pool; "0% CPU" read as "no problem" while the process waits on a connection pool or a page; saturation without a budget, so nobody knows what number is bad until it is paging.
Verification: each saturation metric has a stated budget and a derived alert, and the drill is a capacity squeeze (pool max lowered, or a cpu limit halved) confirming saturation signals move before the SLO burn does.

---

Signal needed: A deploy that made things worse has to be visible in the same view as the degradation, without anyone remembering to note the time.
Schema:
event stream: { time, service, version, git_sha, environment, actor, change_type: deploy|config|flag|schema|scale }
markers: attached to traces and to metric annotations, so a dashboard shows change marks over the SLO burn graph
SLO burn: multi-window burn rate per service, evaluated against the objective, with the recent change list joined to the burn window
Why: the first question in an incident is what changed, and it is answered by a query, not by memory — a change event without a marker in the same view arrives too late to be useful. Flag flips and migrations belong in the same stream as deploys, because in practice they are the changes that surprise people, and config drifts from the pipeline that produced the last good build.
Anti-pattern: deploy markers emitted only by one pipeline, so a manual `kubectl rollout restart` and a flag flip are invisible; a change stream with no actor, which turns the postmortem into a guess; correlating by hand in a spreadsheet and calling it observability.
Verification: a drill makes a deliberate bad config change with no deploy and confirms it appears in the change stream and on the burn graph within the alert window; the drill's timeline is reconstructed from the signals alone, and the first tool opened during a real incident is checked against this expectation rather than against the diagram.

---

Signal needed: Container-level resource pressure that pages the owner rather than the platform team, and a queue consumer that must survive a rollout.
Schema:
metrics: container_cpu_cfs_throttled_periods_total / container_cpu_cfs_periods_total, container_memory_working_set_bytes vs limit, container_fs_usage_bytes vs size limit, kube_pod_container_status_restarts_total
events: kubectl get events filtered for BackOff, OOMKilling, Evicted, FailedScheduling, ReadinessGatesNotReady — with the owning team attached from an owner annotation
annotations: team/owner, slo/objective, oncall/route on every workload, read by tooling rather than written in a wiki
Why: throttling, eviction and restart-loops arrive as cluster events long before they arrive as user-visible errors, and the owner annotation is what lets an alert route to the team that can act instead of to whoever is awake. A queue consumer's readiness is a signal in its own right: a pod that reports ready while it cannot reach the broker produces a silent, growing lag instead of an obvious failure (the workload-side reading is 21).
Anti-pattern: cluster events scraped into a dashboard nobody reads, with no owner and no threshold, so the platform team becomes a human log-shipping service; disk usage measured on the node while the pressure is an ephemeral-storage limit on one container.
Verification: an alert fires on a rising throttling ratio with the owner attached, and a simulated OOMKill plus a readiness-gate failure both route in under the stated window with the owner named, without a human in the loop.

---

Signal needed: level discipline so warn pages a human soon, error means a request failed, and attacker traffic never spends the error budget.
Schema:
level in {debug, info, warn, error} plus outcome on every business refusal; debug off in production; 4xx refusals are info-with-outcome, never error.
logfmt (journald, local tail):
ts=2026-10-08T09:14:02Z level=info service=orders-api route="POST /refunds" tenant=acme-1 outcome=forbidden ms=3 requestId=req_9f2
JSON (collector, same event):
{"ts":"2026-10-08T09:14:02Z","level":"info","service":"orders-api","route":"POST /refunds","tenant":"acme-1","outcome":"forbidden","ms":3,"requestId":"req_9f2"}
{"ts":"2026-10-08T09:14:05Z","level":"warn","service":"orders-api","pool":"cortex_app","active":10,"idle":0,"waiting":41,"requestId":"req_9f2"}
Incident reading: the warn line is the cause and any error line is the symptom, joined on requestId — a 403 ownership refusal stays info because the system worked (it refused), while the pool-saturation warn needs a human before it becomes errors. Business-error codes ride in outcome beside the level, so the error-rate alert counts 5xx plus failed outcomes, never 4xx volume that an attacker controls.
Anti-pattern: log.error on every 404/403, so a credential-stuffing spray becomes a log flood that pages the team — the flood is the DoS completing itself; or debug in the hot path in production, paying double (allocation plus collector cardinality) for lines nobody reads; or one format per service, so the join key changes spelling at the gateway.
Verification: a fixture 403 produces exactly one info line carrying outcome=forbidden and zero error lines; prod sampling asserts debug lines at zero; the alert routes on error plus warn-rate, and a spray drill (10k forged 403s) pages nobody while a pool-exhaustion drill pages once with the owner attached.
