Concept: Order types and when each executes.
Micro-example: stock at 100.00; limit buy at 99.50 fills only at or below 99.50; market buy fills immediately near 100.00 plus spread and impact; stop 98.00 triggers a market sell once touched.
Assumption: quotes shown are tradable size at that instant; thin books slip past them.
Misuse cost: market orders in illiquid opens paying 2% spread as "convenience".
Verification: recompute fill vs quote snapshot; slippage log per order type reviewed.

---

Concept: American vs European exercise styles.
Micro-example: American put on a dividend-paying stock may exercise optimally just before ex-div; European equivalent waits for expiry by contract.
Assumption: exercise follows optimal policy net of costs; real holders deviate.
Misuse cost: pricing an American option with European formulas, understating value where early exercise matters.
Verification: exercise-style flag asserted per contract before any pricing call.

---

Concept: OHLCV semantics and adjustments.
Micro-example: 2-for-1 split turns OHLC 200/205/198/202 with volume 1M into 100/102.5/99/101 with volume 2M; unadjusted series show a fake -50% return.
Assumption: corporate-action history complete and correctly applied in order.
Misuse cost: backtest "discovering" post-split crashes as alpha, trading on accounting fiction.
Verification: adjustment audit per symbol (splits/dividends log vs vendor); return continuity asserted across action dates.

---

Concept: Spread, depth, and market impact intuition.
Micro-example: quoted 100.00 x 100.10 with depth 200 shares; a 5,000-share market buy walks the book to 100.45 average.
Assumption: visible depth is real and stable over the execution horizon (it often is not).
Misuse cost: sizing positions from mid-price, paying impact that exceeds the predicted edge.
Verification: impact estimate (spread cost plus depth-walk model) attached to every simulated fill.

---

Concept: Calls, puts, moneyness, and payoff at expiry in words.
Micro-example: long 100-strike call with 3.00 premium: below 100 expires worthless (lose 3.00); at 105 worth 5.00 (net +2.00); breakeven exactly 103.00 excluding costs.
Assumption: held to expiry with no early exercise or pin effects considered yet.
Misuse cost: quoting gross payoffs as profits, forgetting premium plus costs.
Verification: payoff recomputed per position with premium and costs itemized; breakeven asserted.

---

Concept: Expiry, exercise, and assignment mechanics.
Micro-example: short call assigned overnight leaves short stock Monday morning with margin consequences; cash-settled index options simply credit/debit.
Assumption: assignment when in-the-money at expiry (automatic exercise thresholds vary by broker).
Misuse cost: weekend assignment surprise on an "expired" short position.
Verification: expiry checklist per short position (close, roll, or accept assignment deliberately); broker auto-exercise rules on file.

---

Concept: Black-Scholes assumptions and where each breaks.
Micro-example: 1-month 5%-vol mispricing if the true process jumps (earnings): model says 2.10, market trades 3.40 embedding the jump.
Assumption list: lognormal diffusion, constant vol and rates, frictionless continuous trading, European exercise.
Misuse cost: treating model output as value rather than as a quoted-vol translator.
Verification: assumption checklist per pricing use; earnings/dividend calendar checked before trading model edges.

---

Concept: Binomial intuition as the discrete counterpart.
Micro-example: one-step tree (up 110 / down 95, risk-neutral p from rates) prices the call as discounted expected payoff; refining steps converges toward Black-Scholes value.
Assumption: risk-neutral pricing with the funding rate given; discrete steps approximate the continuous process.
Misuse cost: real-probability pricing ("70% chance it goes up, so worth more") confusing P-measure with Q-measure.
Verification: convergence test (more steps approaches the closed form); P-vs-Q labeling enforced in every writeup.

---

Concept: Implied vs historical volatility and what each answers.
Micro-example: 30-day realized 18%, front-month IV 32% into earnings — the gap prices the known event, not model error.
Assumption: realized computed on clean adjusted returns; IV backed out with correct rates/dividends.
Misuse cost: "selling expensive vol" into a scheduled jump, harvesting premium against a known event.
Verification: event calendar overlaid on every vol comparison; computation inputs (rates, divs) asserted per pricing run.

---

Concept: Smile, skew, and term structure reading.
Micro-example: downside puts at 25-delta trade 6 vol points above ATM while upside calls trade flat — the market charges for crash protection specifically.
Assumption: quotes contemporaneous and comparable (same expiry, clean marks).
Misuse cost: single-vol pricing across strikes, systematically mispricing wings.
Verification: smile snapshot per expiry before any multi-strike trade; wing exposures listed explicitly.

---

Concept: Delta as exposure and hedge ratio.
Micro-example: long call delta 0.55 on 100 shares notional: hedge short 55 shares for delta-neutrality at this instant.
Assumption: small moves, frozen vol surface, continuous rebalancing — all false in practice, approximately true intraday.
Misuse cost: hedging once and "being neutral" through a 5% gap move.
Verification: hedge-rebalance log with timestamps; delta drift alert past the tolerance band.

---

Concept: Gamma as the rate of delta change and the hedging cost driver.
Micro-example: gamma 0.08 near expiry ATM: a 1-point move shifts delta by 0.08, forcing re-hedge; long gamma profits from realized moves, short gamma bleeds on them.
Assumption: smooth surface; pinning and jumps handled as separate regimes.
Misuse cost: short-dated short gamma held into expiry week, hedging costs exceeding collected premium 3-to-1.
Verification: gamma-by-expiry ladder reviewed per book; hedging P&L attributed (theta earned vs gamma paid) daily.

---

Concept: Theta, vega, rho in one breath each with their tradeoffs.
Micro-example: long straddle: negative theta daily (-0.40), positive vega (+1.20 per vol point), small rho; profit needs realized movement or vol expansion exceeding decay.
Assumption: greeks computed under the same model whose limits were accepted above.
Misuse cost: buying premium for direction and watching time decay win quietly.
Verification: theta budget per position (max hold days at zero move); vega exposure summed book-wide.

---

Concept: Second-order greeks (vomma, vanna, charm, veta) and when they matter.
Micro-example: large vanna book into an event: spot-vol co-movement dominates first-order greeks; charm accelerates expiry-week decay beyond theta's quote.
Assumption: second-order small for short holds and small moves — checked, not assumed.
Misuse: ignoring charm on Monday holding Friday expiry, decay running double the theta number.
Verification: second-order report weekly for event and expiry books; material lines hedged or exited deliberately.

---

Concept: GEX/DEX construction from open interest and strike greeks.
Micro-example: aggregate gamma exposure per strike from listed OI times per-contract gamma, signed by dealer positioning assumption; sum across strikes for index-level GEX.
Assumption: OI current, positioning assumption (dealers short/long) stated, retail-vs-dealer split estimated — all approximations with error bars.
Misuse cost: treating a noisy estimate as a physical support level and sizing accordingly.
Verification: input timestamps and positioning assumption printed with every GEX chart; estimate-vs-realized pinning hit rate tracked, not assumed.

---

Concept: Positive vs negative gamma regimes and pinning mechanics.
Micro-example: large positive GEX at 5000 into monthly expiry: dealer hedging dampens moves (sell rallies, buy dips), pinning toward the strike; negative regime inverts (hedging amplifies).
Assumption: dealer positioning dominates marginal flow at those strikes; regimes flip with positioning, not with price alone.
Misuse cost: fading a pin ("must revert") without positioning data, run over by the amplifying regime.
Verification: regime label (positive/negative) with positioning evidence attached; pinning hit-rate tracked per regime separately.

---

Concept: Log returns for time aggregation.
Micro-example: +5% then -5% simple returns net -0.25%, while log returns (+0.0488, -0.0513) sum to -0.0025 exactly and compound correctly across periods.
Assumption: total-return series (dividends/splits adjusted) as input.
Misuse cost: averaging simple returns across periods, overstating multi-period performance.
Verification: aggregation identity test (sum of logs equals log of product); return-type labeled on every series.

---

Concept: Volatility estimators and their gaming modes.
Micro-example: close-to-close 20% vs Parkinson high-low 24% on a trending month — estimator choice moves the number by a fifth.
Assumption: estimator matched to data character (gaps vs intraday range); annualization factor stated (252 vs 365).
Misuse cost: Sharpe inflated by picking the volatility estimator that flatters the track record.
Verification: estimator and annualization printed with every vol number; same-estimator rule across comparisons.

---

Concept: Sharpe/Sortino with gaming modes disclosed.
Micro-example: Sharpe 2.1 on monthly marks hiding intra-month -15% drawdown; Sortino using a 0% target flattering a negatively-skewed return stream.
Assumption: returns i.i.d.-ish (they are not), risk-free rate stated, fees included.
Misuse cost: allocating on headline Sharpe without drawdown, skew, and fee scrutiny.
Verification: Sharpe always accompanied by max drawdown, skew note, and net-of-fees computation; target rate stated for Sortino.

---

Concept: Z-scores and hypothesis tests applied (taught in 03, used here).
Micro-example: strategy daily mean 4bps with 60bps daily vol over 252 days: t = 0.0004/(0.006/sqrt(252)) ≈ 1.06 — indistinguishable from noise.
Assumption: roughly stationary returns; autocorrelation checked (it inflates naive t).
Misuse cost: "profitable backtest" with t ≈ 1 shipped real capital.
Verification: t-statistic and CI printed per backtest; autocorrelation-adjusted errors where persistence detected; t < 2 treated as no evidence.

---

Concept: Lookahead prevention as the first backtest law.
Micro-example: signal using earnings announced after close to "predict" the same day's move — impossible live, perfect in-sample.
Assumption: every input timestamped by availability, not occurrence; point-in-time data only.
Misuse cost: lookahead-inflated Sharpe 3.0 collapsing to 0.4 live.
Verification: availability-lag audit per input (when knowable vs when used); as-of historical datasets where available.

---

Concept: Survivorship and selection bias in universes.
Micro-example: backtest on current index members only, excluding the delisted disasters — the graveyard excluded, returns overstated by design.
Assumption: universe fixed at each historical date with entries/exits recorded.
Misuse cost: "beating the market" by testing against survivors.
Verification: universe snapshot test (historical membership reconstructed); delisted-inclusion spot checks.

---

Concept: Transaction costs and slippage modeled before conclusions.
Micro-example: 200%-turnover strategy with 5bps edge per trade: 2bps spread plus 1bp fees plus impact erases it three times over.
Assumption: cost model calibrated to venue, size, and urgency — not a flat optimistic basis-points guess.
Misuse cost: paper profits that lose money from the first live fill.
Verification: cost schedule per venue attached to every backtest; net-of-all-costs as the headline number, gross banned from headlines.

---

Concept: Overfitting and multiple-testing correction across strategy variants.
Micro-example: 50 parameter variants tried, best Sharpe 2.4 reported alone — expected best-of-50 under pure noise is already elevated.
Assumption: trial count recorded honestly, including discarded variants.
Misuse cost: deploying the luckiest noise fit, decaying immediately out of sample.
Verification: deflated-Sharpe (or Bonferroni-style) adjustment with trial count stated; walk-forward or embargoed out-of-sample required before capital.

---

Concept: Paper-vs-live divergence checklist at launch.
Micro-example: live fills 8bps worse than paper with wider spreads at the traded hour — edge survives but halves.
Assumption: first weeks treated as validation, sized accordingly.
Misuse cost: full sizing on day one against unvalidated assumptions.
Verification: divergence log (paper vs live per fill) reviewed weekly for the first quarter; kill criteria pre-committed (divergence past X sustained Y days halts trading).

---

Concept: In retrieval-injected generation, the token budget is the binding constraint, and "stuff more context in" is a cost and accuracy decision, not a free win.
Micro-example: A ticket assistant retrieves ten chunks because the endpoint allows it. The prompt's context grows, the model's accuracy on the relevant field falls as the retrieved noise competes with the one useful chunk, and the per-request cost rises with the input length, which is the part that reaches the invoice. The fix is ranked retrieval with a per-request context budget, a per-request chunk cap, and a reranker that removes chunks rather than ordering them politely.
`{"endpoint":"ticket-assistant","contextBudget":{"maxChunks":4,"maxInputTokens":3000,"overflow":"drop-lowest-rank"},"observed":{"p99InputTokens":2942,"chunksUsed":[3,4,4,2]}}`
The budget and the observation live in the same config file, because a budget nobody measures against becomes a wish.
Assumption: Retrieval precision is measured (hit rate on the relevant chunk), the cost per request is measured with input and output tokens accounted separately, and the latency budget allows a reranking pass.
Misuse cost: Long-context prompting hides a retrieval problem behind spend, and the failure mode is asymmetric: quality looks plausible while cost grows and the answer degrades on exactly the questions with the most near-duplicate chunks. Teams discover it as a bill, not as a metric.
Verification: A context-budget test asserts the prompt never exceeds the stated input budget at the 99th percentile of retrieved sets; an eval run compares the capped-and-ranked prompt against the stuffed prompt on the golden set, reporting accuracy and cost together; the report states which chunks were used, so a wrong answer can be traced to retrieval rather than to generation.

---

Concept: An LLM judge is a measurement instrument, and like any instrument it is calibrated against a reference and re-checked for drift.
Micro-example: A judge scores generated SQL correctness. Against 200 human-labelled examples it agrees with the senior reviewer most of the time, disagrees mainly on queries whose result is empty for the fixture data, and the disagreement direction is stable. Only then is its score used to gate a change, and the disagreement class is written into the report rather than averaged away.
Assumption: A human-labelled reference set exists and is large enough to estimate agreement; the judge model and prompt are pinned; the reference is refreshed when the task distribution moves, and the judge is re-checked against it on a schedule rather than once at adoption.
Misuse cost: An uncalibrated judge turns a silent quality regression into a passing gate, and worse, an uncalibrated judge drifts with the model it scores — the pair can move together, so the metric stays flat while output quality slides. A judge score used without a human anchor becomes feedback that trains the pipeline on the judge's own preferences.
Verification: Agreement with the human reference is reported with its uncertainty rather than as a single number, the disagreement cases are sampled by hand at a fixed cadence, and a deliberate bad output is fed to the judge as a positive control to confirm it can still fail something.

---

Concept: An agent loop needs no-progress detection and a budget, because its failure mode is not a crash but an expensive, confident circle.
Micro-example: A coding agent edits a file, re-runs the test, reads the same assertion failure, edits again in the same direction. Without detection, the loop consumes its step budget and produces a diff that does not compile; with detection, the run ends after the second identical failure with a transcript that says what was tried.
Assumption: Each step emits a structured event (tool, arguments, result hash, token cost), so identical calls and repeated failures are detectable; the task carries a step limit, a token limit and a wall-clock limit, and exhausting one is a normal terminal state, not an error to swallow.
Misuse cost: Undetected looping is the most expensive class of agent failure: it looks like work in the transcript, it produces cost without progress, and it scales with the autonomy granted. Retry-on-empty-response, added to help, multiplies it.
Verification: A test with a stubbed tool that always fails the same way asserts the run terminates within the step budget and the terminal event names the reason; a replay of a recorded loop transcript asserts the detector fires on it, and the eval reports per-task step counts so a distributional change in looping shows up as a metric rather than as a bill (the cost-accounting requirement is 29's, the suite discipline is 18's).
