Concept: Lawful basis recorded per processing purpose, never assumed globally.
Rule: every personal-data use (accounts, orders, marketing, analytics, fraud) carries its named basis (contract, consent, legitimate interest with balancing test, legal obligation).
Violation: "consent" banner covering everything including contract-necessary order processing, with no record of which basis covers what.
Practice: purpose registry mapping each flow to its basis; consent granular per purpose with withdrawal honoring; legitimate-interest assessments filed.
Verification: purpose-to-basis matrix reviewed per new feature; consent-withdrawal drill asserts processing stops for that purpose only.

---

Concept: Data-subject access requests answered completely and on time.
Rule: identity verified proportionately, all personal data across services compiled within one month, third-party data protected in the response.
Violation: CSV of the users row only, missing events, logs, Kafka-derived profiles, and support tickets.
Practice: DSR runbook with per-system extraction queries (database, warehouse, logs, telemetry, backups index), identity check scaled to data sensitivity.
Verification: drill DSR completed against the clock; completeness checklist per system signed.

---

Concept: Erasure executed against a deletion map, not ad-hoc queries.
Rule: every store holding personal data registered with its deletion path and owner; erasure runs the map, not memory.
Violation: user row deleted, seven downstream copies (warehouse, search index, backups, logs, analytics, emails, ML features) intact.
Practice: deletion map per data class; cascade jobs for live stores; crypto-shredding keys for backups where rewrite is infeasible.
Verification: post-erasure probe queries every registered store; map coverage audited — unregistered stores are findings.

---

Concept: Erasure vs retention resolved explicitly, never by accident.
Rule: audit, tax, and fraud records carry legal retention schedules that override erasure narrowly; everything else erases.
Violation: "legal obligation" invoked blanket-wide to refuse all erasures while marketing keeps the data too.
Practice: retention schedule per data class with legal basis and expiry; erasure suppresses non-exempt uses immediately and schedules exempt-copy deletion at expiry.
Verification: retention-vs-erasure matrix reviewed with counsel annually; exempt-copy deletion jobs assert completion.

---

Concept: Backups that cannot forget handled by design, not discovered in a DSR.
Rule: backup strategy chosen with erasure in mind: crypto-shredding (per-tenant keys, destroy key to forget) or bounded retention with documented re-deletion on restore.
Violation: 7-year immutable backups containing data erased everywhere else, discovered during the regulator's follow-up question.
Practice: strategy decided before the first DSR; restore procedure includes re-running pending erasures.
Verification: restore drill asserts erasure survival (deleted stays deleted post-restore); strategy documented in the DPIA.

---

Concept: Portability delivered in usable structured formats.
Rule: export core account and order data as structured, commonly-used, machine-readable files with a data dictionary.
Violation: PDF "export" of screenshots, unusable for porting and embarrassing under scrutiny.
Practice: JSON/CSV exports generated from the same DTOs the API serves; dictionary documents every field.
Verification: export-import round trip into a test account; field-coverage test against the DTO surface.

---

Concept: DPIA triggers identified before processing starts.
Rule: new large-scale profiling, sensitive data, systematic monitoring, or novel tech triggers a Data Protection Impact Assessment with mitigation tracking.
Violation: fraud-scoring model live for a year, DPIA "planned" after the complaint arrives.
Practice: trigger checklist in the design template; DPIA owned with mitigations ticketed like any launch blocker.
Verification: design-review gate asks the trigger questions; unassessed high-risk processing blocked like a failing test.

---

Concept: Breach notification clock starts at awareness, not at full understanding.
Rule: 72-hour supervisory notification with phased detail; affected individuals notified without undue delay where high risk; all timed from awareness.
Violation: three-week "investigation" before notifying, clock argued from the final report date.
Practice: breach runbook with hour-0 containment, hour-24 scoping draft, hour-48 notification draft; DPO looped at hour zero.
Verification: tabletop drill timed against the 72-hour bound; notification templates pre-approved by counsel.

---

Concept: Cross-border transfers with a valid mechanism, documented per flow.
Rule: adequacy decision, SCCs with transfer impact assessment, or derogation — named per destination, reviewed on legal change.
Violation: US analytics vendor added by marketing with no mechanism on file.
Practice: transfer registry per vendor (mechanism, assessment date, supplementary measures like encryption); procurement blocked without it.
Verification: vendor-onboarding gate requires the mechanism entry; registry reviewed on Schrems-style rulings within the quarter.

---

Concept: Privacy by design in new features, verified in review.
Rule: data minimization (collect only what the feature uses), purpose limitation (no secondary use without new basis), default-private settings.
Violation: "date of birth for personalization" on a checkout form, stored forever, used never.
Practice: data-needs section in every design doc; defaults private; retention set at creation, not "later".
Verification: design-review checklist with the three questions; field-addition test asserts purpose registration.

---

Concept: Children's and special-category data handled as prohibited-by-default.
Rule: no special-category inference (health, beliefs, ethnicity) from behavior or purchases; age-gating where the product could attract children.
Violation: pregnancy-prediction scores from purchase patterns shared with marketing segments.
Practice: inference allow-list (only explicitly approved models); special-category features require DPIA plus counsel sign-off.
Verification: inference-output audit against the allow-list; segment-definition review per new audience.

---

Concept: Processor and sub-processor discipline across vendors.
Rule: Article-28 terms with every processor; sub-processor list maintained with objection rights; audits or certifications checked, not assumed.
Violation: support tool with full database read "temporarily" for two years, no DPA on file.
Practice: vendor register with DPA status, data scope, and review dates; access scoped to the support function with expiry.
Verification: register completeness audit quarterly; expired-DPA finding blocks renewal, not just flags it.

---

Concept: Adjacent EU regimes as explicit recognition-only references, never developed here.
Rule: One responsible line each: the EU Data Act (2023/2854) grants access rights to connected-device data; NIS2 (2022/2555) extends incident-reporting obligations to significant entities; the Cyber Resilience Act (2024/2847) obliges manufacturers to support and report vulnerabilities in products; the AI Act (2024/1689) imposes transparency and risk obligations on AI systems. None of these program-specific duties are owned by this corpus — counsel, security, or the specific-product team owns them.
Practice: Cross-reference, never coopt: gdpr blocks stay purely GDPR-mechanics; the four references above are the only touch points.
Verification: Grep proves each of the four names appears once, as a pointer, not as glossed content.

---

Concept: Consent withdrawal propagated downstream, not just recorded.
Rule: withdrawal for a purpose stops that purpose's processing everywhere, including processors and sub-processors holding the data.
Violation: banner records "marketing: withdrawn" while the email vendor keeps sending from last month's export.
Practice: withdrawal event fanned out to every processor in the purpose's chain with per-vendor acknowledgement; exports regenerated, not patched.
Verification: withdrawal drill asserts vendor silence within the contracted window; unacknowledged fan-out is a finding.

---

Concept: Legitimate-interest balancing as a written test, not a label.
Rule: purpose, necessity (no milder means), and balancing (subject's interests vs controller's) documented before processing starts.
Violation: "legitimate interest: analytics" with no assessment, covering full clickstream plus keystroke timings.
Practice: three-part assessment per purpose, signed, with the milder-means analysis explicit (aggregates vs raw events).
Verification: assessment present per legitimate-interest purpose; keystroke-level collection under a balancing test fails review.

---

Concept: ML feature stores and embeddings on the deletion map.
Rule: derived stores (profiles, embeddings, training slices) are stores like any other: registered with deletion paths, erased on request.
Violation: account deleted while its embedding row keeps personalizing and its events remain in the next training export.
Practice: feature store keyed by subject id with tombstone propagation; training exports rebuilt from live data, never from frozen snapshots containing erased subjects.
Verification: post-erasure probe includes the feature store and the export manifest; lingering vector is a finding.

---

Concept: Records of processing (RoPA) maintained as a living register.
Rule: processing inventory (purposes, data classes, recipients, retention, transfers) current per flow, owned, reviewed on change.
Violation: RoPA written once for launch, missing four launches and two vendors two years later.
Practice: RoPA entry updated in the same change that ships the feature; ownership named per entry.
Verification: RoPA-to-code drift audit per quarter (every personal-data flow appears); feature without a RoPA entry blocked like a missing test.

---

Concept: Telemetry and log retention in rolling windows, not forever.
Rule: logs and traces carrying identifiers kept to the window the debugging need justifies (days to weeks), then dropped or aggregated identifier-free.
Violation: seven years of debug logs with user ids "because storage is cheap", each a breach-scope multiplier.
Practice: retention windows per log class in the logging config; aggregation jobs strip identifiers past the window; access to raw windows gated.
Verification: oldest-record probe per log class within its window; identifier presence past the window is a finding.

---

Concept: Processor breach notification upward without undue delay.
Rule: processors notify the controller promptly on becoming aware of a breach, with the facts needed for the 72-hour clock — the controller's clock does not wait for the processor's root cause.
Violation: vendor's "preliminary investigation" consuming five days of the controller's 72 hours.
Practice: DPA terms fix notification timing and content (nature, categories, approximate subjects, contact point); vendor incidents paged to the DPO path.
Verification: vendor-notification drill timed from vendor awareness to controller receipt; missing DPA timing clause blocks procurement.

---

Concept: Third-party data redacted from access responses.
Rule: other people's personal data (messages from other users, shared-document co-authors) excluded or redacted in the requester's export.
Violation: full message thread exported including the other party's content, creating a breach inside a compliance response.
Practice: per-field third-party flags in the export pipeline; co-authored content exported as the requester's contributions only.
Verification: export fixture with mixed authorship redacts correctly; unflagged third-party field is a finding.

---

Concept: Age assurance proportionate to the risk, not blanket ID checks.
Rule: where the product could attract children, age-gating with the least intrusive effective means; no general identity collection as a side effect.
Violation: full ID verification for a newsletter signup, storing scans indefinitely.
Practice: tiered assurance (self-declaration, hard gate only where required); verification artifacts deleted after the decision.
Verification: artifact-retention probe (nothing kept post-decision); blanket ID collection fails the minimization review.

---

Concept: Legal holds suspend erasure openly, with scope and expiry.
Rule: litigation or investigation hold pauses deletion for the held records only, documented with matter, scope, and review date — never a silent global freeze.
Violation: "legal hold" invoked with no matter named, erasure queue stalled for two years across all data.
Practice: hold register (matter, custodian scope, expiry/review); erasure resumes automatically at release; holds reviewed, not renewed by inertia.
Verification: hold register reviewed per quarter; expired hold still blocking erasure is a finding.

---

Concept: New products ship default-private with telemetry opt-in.
Rule: defaults collect the minimum; behavioral telemetry requires explicit opt-in, stated before collection starts.
Violation: full session replay on by default, opt-out buried three menus deep.
Practice: default-off telemetry flags; opt-in screen naming exactly what is collected and why; settings change stops collection, not just display.
Verification: fresh-install probe (defaults private, no telemetry egress); opt-out-then-use test shows zero collection traffic.

---

Concept: Sub-processor changes announced with objection rights honored.
Rule: new sub-processors notified in advance with the window to object exercised in practice, not buried in a terms update.
Violation: analytics sub-processor swapped silently; objection right discovered after a year of processing.
Practice: change notice per engagement with data scope and mechanism carried over; objection path tested (one real objection honored per cycle if raised).
Verification: sub-processor list diffed against notices per quarter; silent swap is a finding.

---

Concept: Analytics identity kept pseudonymous with the key held apart.
Rule: analytics identifiers unlinkable without a separately-held key; the key lives outside the analytics system with its own access control and retention.
Violation: analytics id equals the account id, every dashboard query one join from identity.
Practice: keyed pseudonyms per analytics domain; key store isolated; re-identification requires the documented approval, logged.
Verification: join-probe (analytics id alone resolves nothing); key-access log reviewed; shared-key analytics fails review.

---

Concept: The subject-access right is a retrieval and identity requirement written in law, and the automated-decision right is an explanation requirement the schema has to support.
Rule: A data subject is entitled to obtain the personal data held about them, and — where a decision producing significant effects is made solely by automated means — to meaningful information about the logic involved and to obtain human intervention. Identity must be verified before disclosure, and the response clock starts on the request, not on the completion of the export.
Practice: The export is an internal API over the systems that hold the subject's rows, keyed by a subject-identifier map rather than by each table's own id, and it is exercised on a schedule so the first run is not during a statutory deadline. The decision record is a persisted artifact per decision: inputs used, model or rule version, the factors that moved it, the outcome, and a reference to the reviewable path plus the human who can overturn it.
Violation: An export that took weeks because a table was added and nobody updated the map — incomplete disclosure is the common failure, not refusal; and a decision record that stores the score and nothing else, which cannot answer "why" and cannot be reviewed, so the human-intervention right becomes a re-run of the same model.
Verification: A drill runs the full export against production-shaped data, reports duration and coverage per system, and diffs the covered table list against the schema inventory; a decision record from the last release is read by someone who did not make the decision, who can say what would have changed the outcome (deletion's engineering side is the neighbouring record, and 26's retention clock is its mirror image).

---

Concept: Purpose limitation is a schema and pipeline constraint: analytics and profiling are separate purposes with separate bases, and consent is not the universal solvent.
Rule: Personal data collected for one purpose may not be processed as though it had been collected for another; the lawful basis is chosen per purpose, documented, and it constrains what a later use may be. Direct marketing to existing customers on similar products is treated differently from profiling for a new purpose, and a special-category purpose needs its own condition.
Practice: Each dataset records its purpose and basis in its own metadata, so a pipeline reads "orders for fulfilment" rather than inferring intent from a table name. Consent, where it is the basis, is stored with timestamp, purpose text, version and source, and withdrawal is an event that reaches every downstream system that consumed it — which makes the consent record an operational dependency, not a checkbox log.
Violation: The "we already had consent for analytics" reuse for profiling or ad targeting, where the analytics purpose text does not cover the new use and the basis was never the one being relied on; and a withdrawal that flips a flag in one service while the analytics pipeline keeps the old rows and the partner export keeps sending them.
Verification: A withdrawal test asserts the subject disappears from the analytics audience and from the next partner export within the stated window; a purpose-basis inventory is reviewed when a new consumer appears, and the review is a change to a record rather than a meeting note.

---

Concept: Pseudonymised data is still personal data; anonymised data is a claim about re-identification risk, and cross-border transfer adds an assessment on top of whichever one it is.
Rule: Data that can be re-linked to a person by means reasonably likely to be used remains within scope, so hashing an email with a static key is pseudonymisation, not anonymisation. Where protected data leaves the jurisdiction, the transfer needs a valid mechanism (standard contractual clauses, an adequacy basis) plus a practical assessment of the destination's law and of what the recipient can actually compel.
Practice: The re-identification surface is documented: the key's location and custodian, the quasi-identifiers left in the dataset, and whether the recipient holds any other data that could join to it. Analytics gets column-level minimisation and, where the analysis permits, aggregation or generalisation instead of identifiers — which reduces the surface without making the anonymisation claim grander than it is.
`{"subject":"subject_9f2c","systems":[{"system":"orders-api","rows":41,"fields":["email","shipping_address","last_ip"]},{"system":"support-tickets","rows":6,"fields":["body","attachment_names"]}],"covered_tables":187,"exported_at":"2026-10-07T09:00:00Z"}`
The field that decides whether the disclosure is complete is `covered_tables` compared against the schema inventory — never `rows`, which reads as effort.
Violation: A "pseudonymised" export with date of birth, postcode and gender in it — joinable to an electoral roll by anyone patient — and a transfer to a new processor's region made in a configuration change, with no mechanism and no assessment on file (the config-drift habit is 09's, the export path's controls are 06's).
Verification: A re-identification test attempts the join with data available in-house and reports whether the subject was found; the transfer register names the mechanism, the assessment date and the reviewer, and it fails a build check when a new processor region appears without an entry.
