Target: Java 25 (10) — secret exposure on the reporting path.
Fixture: a component that reads credentials from the environment and a web reporting path that omits the redaction layer the rest of the pipeline applies.
How it fails: the value is masked on screen, but the startup report and the retry path write the raw token, and the audit stage files it under a counter-like field name so nothing looks secret-shaped to the log pipeline.
Pass bar: every sink renders the label and never the value; the startup report shows the name of the entry only.
Failing evidence: a test that greps emitted log lines for the fixture value fails the CI stage on any hit — and the boot report is the sink that fails first, because it is written before the redactor is installed.
Impact: the secret now lives in every system that can read logs, which is a far wider audience than the systems that were ever granted the credential, and it survives the incident because nobody rotates a value they never saw in a log.
Remediation pointer: read secrets through a facade that redacts by default and install it before startup reporting (09 kind 1 and kind 2; the invariant is 06's trust-boundary rule).
Regression test: an assertion on rendered startup and retry output that fails whenever the raw value appears, run in CI with a value that is not empty at test time.

---

Target: Spring Boot 4.1 (11) — two security filter chains.
Fixture: one chain declared as a bean through the Security 7 lambda DSL and a second, older-style configurer that gets picked up by component scanning and loads after the first.
How it fails: the later chain wins for the routes it matches, so `/actuator/health` starts answering 401 to the prober while every request that depends on the intended filter order is admitted without the ownership filter it was assumed to have.
Pass bar: exactly one filter chain is logged at startup for the application's route space, and non-bean configurers are not resolvable in the context.
Failing evidence: one route cluster returns 401 while an adjacent cluster that should be stricter returns 200, and the startup log names two chains.
Impact: the deployment is two applications wearing one port, and the one that answers dropped the allow-list that used to enforce ownership.
Remediation pointer: one `@EnableWebSecurity` configuration, lambda DSL only, actuator on its own management port (11 kind 4 and kind 8; the legacy form is a `Legacy:` block in 11).
Regression test: a security slice test requests the critical routes and asserts the expected status and the chain identity, plus a startup assertion on the chain count.

---

Target: PostgreSQL 18 (12) — RLS that the policy author cannot see failing.
Fixture: tenant policies bound to a session variable, a `SECURITY DEFINER` helper that sets that variable without pinning `search_path`, and a table whose RLS is defined but not forced because the migration never touched ownership.
How it fails: the helper runs as a different role and resolves an unqualified helper name through the caller's path, and the app connects as the table owner — so a cross-tenant row satisfies the policy window and the owner path bypasses the policy entirely.
Pass bar: policy coverage is stage-monotonic, every tenant table forces row security, the definer pins `search_path`, and a cross-tenant probe returns zero rows on a direct connection.
Failing evidence: with all roles collapsed to the app's own credentials, a fixture-tenant probe still returns rows.
`psql -U app_owner -c 'select count(*) from orders' → 412893` where the same query as `app_runtime` returns 9812 — the owner role sails past a policy that never bound it, and every test that connected as the owner agreed that the control worked.
Impact: cross-tenant reads that everyone can prove RLS stops appear nowhere in the application log, because from the database's point of view nothing was violated.
Remediation pointer: tenant metadata in the session, never passed across a schema boundary; `FORCE ROW LEVEL SECURITY` on every tenant table; app role is neither owner nor bypass-capable (12 kind 6; invariant in 06).
Regression test: a migration-suite test asserts `relforcerowsecurity` per tenant table and asserts the app role's attributes, plus a per-role cross-tenant probe.

---

Target: Kafka 4.3 (13) — group protocol flip under a rolling deploy.
Fixture: SASL/SCRAM enabled on the transfer path, `auto.create.topics` left on, brokers restarted onto pre-existing storage, and `group.protocol` set to `consumer` in one place and unset in another.
How it fails: a pod that starts without the property falls back to the classic protocol, lag jumps when the group splits across the two protocols, and the producer's epoch churns while the controller is short of quorum — the state that looks like a rebalance storm and is actually a configuration split.
Pass bar: `group.protocol=consumer` is the only value anywhere in the fleet, no broker changes its own identity on reaching startup, and per-broker storage state is verified before the roll.
Failing evidence: brokers log a node identity change against existing storage, and producer side/epoch resets cluster in one window instead of spreading.
Impact: exactly-once claims stop being provable, because there is no clean cutoff to wait for — and "no duplicates" cannot be asserted about a window whose end cannot be named.
Remediation pointer: pin node identity, verify storage state per broker before the roll, boot-assert the protocol property, and turn off automatic topic creation (13 kind 1 and kind 7; the failure transcript shape is 02).
Regression test: a rolling restart under deliberately conflicting configuration fails the assertion instead of falling forward, and an EOS audit over repeated restarts reports zero duplicates and zero gaps.

---

Target: HTTP API (14) — CSRF posture on a cookie-authenticated refresh.
Fixture: access token in a header, refresh cookie `SameSite=Lax`, mutating endpoints relying on the old per-route header check that was dropped in one controller during a refactor.
How it fails: a cross-site top-level POST still carries the refresh cookie, and the endpoint that lost its token check authorizes on the cookie alone, so one navigation replays one mutation.
Pass bar: every mutating route that accepts ambient credentials requires the token-or-header proof, and SameSite plus Fetch Metadata are recorded as defense-in-depth rather than as the control.
Failing evidence: a cross-site probe returns 200 where the same request from origin returns 200 and the unproxied cross-site variant returns 403.
Impact: any page that can run script in the victim's browser can spend one of the victim's mutations, and the attacker never needs to read a response.
Remediation pointer: bind mutating endpoints to the header token plus the cookie, keep the bearer path primary, and treat state-changing GETs as a defect (14 kind 7 and 16 kind 6; mechanism in 06 kind 4).
Regression test: a CSRF matrix test asserts 403 for cross-site, 200 for same-origin, across every mutating route, generated from the route inventory rather than hand-listed.

---

Target: TypeScript 7 with 6-compat (15) — a build that passes in CI and fails on a customer machine.
Fixture: routes declared as template-literal types, an enum that survives at runtime, and a tsconfig that still carries a flag 7.0 turns into a hard error.
How it fails: the 6 compiler builds the package quietly, the 7 compiler emits differently for the enum, and a consumer on a native-transpiler path with `erasableSyntaxOnly` cannot emit the enum at all — so the artifact that CI blessed is broken where the toolchain differs.
Pass bar: every tsconfig in the repo compiles clean on both 6 and 7 with `stableTypeOrdering` on and no `ignoreDeprecations`, and no non-erasable syntax in published packages.
Failing evidence: 6 builds, 7 reports the deprecated option, and the bundle step fails on the enum's emitted runtime artifact.
Impact: the failure surfaces at the customer's build, which is the only environment nobody monitors, and the bug report contains a stack trace that names neither of the two misconfigurations.
Remediation pointer: replace the enum with a const object plus union type, drop the removed flag, and add the dual-compiler matrix to CI (15 kinds 1 and 2; the native type-stripping rationale is in 15 kind 6).
Regression test: a CI matrix step runs both compilers against two export shapes and asserts identical public type surface plus a clean emit.

---

Target: Vue 3.5 (16) — one `v-html` in an otherwise clean renderer.
Fixture: access token in memory, refresh in an httpOnly cookie, and one incident-message route rendering operator text through `v-html` because a support ticket asked for bold.
How it fails: the interpolation-only guarantee holds everywhere except that route, so attacker-controlled operator text executes in a running session that already has the access token and a refresh path.
Pass bar: the refresh token never leaves the httpOnly cookie, and every render path for user-generated strings is interpolation-only with a named, audited sanitizer exception where markup is genuinely required.
Failing evidence: a fixture payload in the string renders live in the DOM instead of inert.
Impact: one operator-authored string carries the full authority of the session that renders it, which is a different trust model from the one every other route in the app assumes.
Remediation pointer: ban `v-html` with a lint rule and an exception process that names the sanitizer and the call site (16 kind 6; Trusted Types and CSP coordination are in the same file, mechanism in 06 kind 3).
Regression test: a component test renders the payload fixture and asserts no element is created and no handler fires, plus a CI grep for `v-html` outside the allow-listed files.

---

Target: TanStack Vue Query v5 (17) — a tenant-scoped cache that roams.
Fixture: an infinite query whose key uses a short tenant tuple, a mutation that rewires cached entities, and a second file still writing the older, shorter key shape.
How it fails: two key shapes name the same data, invalidation misses one of them, and a page prefetched under one tenant is served to another for the duration of one navigation.
Pass bar: keys come from one factory shared by every hook and invalidation site, the tuple is complete, and every route hydrates the same first page it will render.
Failing evidence: after a tenant switch, the infinite query from the new tenant shows the old tenant's rows until a refetch lands.
Impact: two tenants see the same list on the same screen for one interaction, which is a cross-tenant read that no server-side test can ever see.
Remediation pointer: one key factory, tenant in every key, and an empty result when the tenant id is missing rather than a key with a hole in it (17 kind 1; the server-side invariant is 06 and 12).
Regression test: a test with a fake server asserts the hydrated first page belongs to the current tenant and that a tenant switch cannot reuse a cached page.

---

Target: Architecture (19) — tenant from the route parameter.
Fixture: a handler reads `tenant_id` from the path, then uses the first row of the result set as the tenant for the rest of the request.
How it fails: switching the parameter surfaces another tenant's summary, and the framework's isolation was configured, not derived — so the request that looks tenant-scoped is scoped to whatever the client asserted.
Pass bar: the tenant derives from the verified principal, every route is scoped to that verified value, and RLS is the enforcement point rather than the reviewer's assumption.
Failing evidence: a fixture request with a foreign tenant id returns rows, and the handler's result set is still the first one because the closure captured it.
Impact: cross-tenant leakage with no framework-level protection and no failing test, which is how the pattern survives three audits.
Remediation pointer: derive the tenant per request from the verified claim, never from the path, and enforce at the resource boundary with RLS behind it (06's trust-boundary invariant, 12 kind 6 for the policy, 07 kind 9 for the claim).
Regression test: a probe with a foreign tenant id returns zero rows under a forced RLS boundary, and the route-inventory test asserts every tenant-scoped route derives the tenant.

---

Target: CI/CD and infra (21) — `pull_request_target` holding production secrets.
Fixture: a workflow that runs `mvn verify` on `pull_request_target`, awaits a green build, then deploys — and a secrets block that hands the job the deploy credentials at step one.
How it fails: the fork controls the tree the job executes, so a symlinked `.env` at the expected path, or one line in the build script, reads a credential that was never intended for fork code, and the job log is a channel with no egress control at all.
Pass bar: no secret reaches any step that runs fork-authored code; production deploys sit behind an environment gate with approvers, and the fork job runs with `contents: read` only.
Failing evidence: a fork PR's run log shows a mangled echo of a token, or the workflow's resolved permissions are broader than the job's need.
`Run actions/checkout@v4 — with token: ***` followed by `curl -s -H "Authorization: Bearer $GITHUB_TOKEN" https://api.test/repos/acme/orders/secrets | jq '.secrets | length' → 17` — the mask in the log is the only thing that made it look safe.
Impact: a pull request turns a private credential into public information, and the exposure is only interesting to the person who reads the log afterwards.
Remediation pointer: fork PRs build without secrets, actions pinned by SHA, `persist-credentials: false`, workflow lint in CI, environment protection on production (21 kind 4, 09 kind 4, and the exploit shape is 31).
Regression test: workflow static analysis fails on `pull_request_target` with secrets in scope and no environment gate, and a fixture fork PR asserts no secret-shaped value appears in its log.
